# List of Númenóreans

In J. R. R. Tolkien's fictional legendarium, the Númenóreans are the inhabitants of the island of Númenor. The following is a list of Númenóreans named in Tolkien's works, other than the rulers, who are described at Rulers of Númenor. See also the culture of Númenor. Dates in the following list refer to the Second Age ('S.A.'). The Númenóreans typically had very long lives: two centuries and more.

A
Ailinel, born S.A. 712, was the second child and elder daughter of Tar-Meneldur and his wife Almarian. She married Orchaldor, and they had a son, Soronto, born S.A. 799.
Almarian was the wife of Írimon; in S.A. 740 he succeeded as Tar-Meneldur, fifth King of Númenor, and Almarian became the queen-consort. They were the parents of one son (Aldarion, born S.A. 700) and two daughters (Ailinel, born 712, and Almiel born 729). Almarian's father was Vëantur, the Captain of the King's Ships under Tar-Elendil. He was a famous mariner and was the first Númenórean to reach Middle-earth, reaching the Grey Havens and befriending Gil-galad. Almarian's son Aldarion learned much about ships and the sea from Vëantur, his grandfather. Almarian also approved of Erendis and wanted her son to marry her. Eventually, in S.A. 870, they did marry, to Almarian's joy. In S.A. 883 her husband abdicated, and their son Aldarion succeeded as King; Almarian effectively became the queen mother. For the first eighteen years of Aldarion's reign, his daughter Ancalimë often lived with Almarian (Ancalimë's grandmother) in Armenelos.
Amandil
Anárion
Axantur (b. S.A. 395) was the youngest child of Nolondil (who himself was the youngest child of Vardamir, the notional second King of Númenor). Axantur had three children: Lindissë, daughter (b. S.A. 551); Ardamir, son (b. S.A. 562); Cemendur, son (b. S.A. 575).
B
Beregar, of the House of Bëor, lived in Emerië, primarily a sheep-farming district. He married Núneth, and they had a daughter, Erendis, born in S.A. 771. Erendis married Aldarion, the King's Heir, in S.A. 870. Beregar and his wife are last referred to in S.A. 879, when they were still living in Emerië. Beregar favoured the use of Elvish languages in his house.
Berúthiel was a Black Númenórean woman who married a king of Gondor. In The Lord of the Rings, Aragorn uses Berúthiel's cats as a byword for navigation in the dark: "Gandalf is surer of finding the way home in a blind night than the cats of Queen Berúthiel".[1]
C
Cemendur son of Axantur. Cemendur, born S.A. 575, was the youngest child of Axantur, a descendant of the royal family of Númenor. Cemendur had two children: Írildë, daughter (b. S.A. 700); Hallatan of Hyarastorni, son (b. S.A. 711).
Ciryatur which is Sindarin for Ship-Lord, was an admiral in the Númenórean navy sent by Tar-Minastir to Middle-earth in S.A. 1700 to aid Gil-galad, the King of the High Elves, against the armies of Sauron, the Dark Lord. In the War of the Elves and Sauron, the Dark Lord's forces overran the lands of Eriador, and Sauron threatened to conquer all of Middle-earth. Gil-galad sent to Númenor for help, and Tar-Minastir responded by sending an immense fleet to the aid of the Elves. The Númenórean fleet was led by the great admiral Ciryatur, who cunningly divided his forces, sending some into the south while his main fleet landed in Lindon. Ciryatur's Númenórean warriors proved more than equal to Sauron's armies, and forced them southwards out of Eriador. At the decisive Battle of the Gwathló, Sauron was trapped between the two Númenórean armies, and almost captured. Though he escaped in the end and returned to Mordor, he swore vengeance on the victorious Númenóreans. More than 1,600 years later, he accomplished his aim and Númenor was destroyed, so that Ciryatur's great victory can be seen as the first seed of the Downfall of his home.
E
Eärendur son of Tar-Amandil: (b. S.A. 361), the younger son of Tar-Amandil, who was the third King of Númenor. He had a son Caliondo, who in turn had a son, Malantur. Malantur was apparently a possible heir to Tar-Aldarion, his cousin, but the law was changed so Aldarion's daughter Ancalimë would be the heir.
Eärendur of Andúnië: The fifteenth to hold the title of Lord of Andúnië, he lived during the time of Ar-Sakalthôr, the twenty-second King of Númenor. He is mentioned in the histories of the Second Age as the brother of Lindórië, who was the grandmother of the wise King Tar-Palantir. As Lord of Andúnië, Eärendur was also the ancestor of the Kings of the Dúnedain in Middle-earth: Aragorn was his direct descendant through no less than forty-four generations.
Elatan of Andúnië: A nobleman of Andúnië, and the husband of Silmariën, who was the eldest child of Tar-Elendil. He was possibly a direct-male descendant of Elros; in any case his own direct male descendants were the Lords of Andúnië, beginning with his son Valandil (born S.A. 630); they in turn were the direct male ancestors of the Kings of Arnor and Gondor, including Aragorn.
Elendil
Elendur was born in S.A. 3299, the eldest son of Isildur, the heir of the Lords of Andúnië. In S.A. 3319 Elendur and his family escaped the Downfall of Númenor in the nine ships. Elendur landed with his father in Middle-earth, where they founded the kingdom of Gondor. Elendur's mother was also aboard; his three younger brothers were born in Middle-earth. In S.A. 3441, the last year of the Age, his father succeeded as the High King of Arnor and Gondor, and Elendur became the crown prince. Within two years, in T.A. 2, Elendur, his father and two of his brothers were killed in the Disaster of the Gladden Fields; Elendur was aged 143. The fact that Isildur was succeeded by Valandil, Elendur's youngest brother, indicates that Elendur (and his two dead brothers) had no children. His namesake Elendur of Arnor, the ninth king of Arnor, was a descendant of Valandil.
Erendis (S.A. 771–985) was the wife of King Tar-Aldarion and, as such, the Queen Consort of Númenor. Erendis was beautiful, fell in love with Aldarion as a young maiden, and was approved by his parents as a suitable consort. They had in common a desire to have their own will in all things; both from childhood were stubborn.[2] Aldarion, being the King's Heir, seems to have been little restrained by the duties of that position until adulthood. Erendis, too, was self-willed, reluctant ever to compromise, as her own mother Núneth observed; even in childhood for Erendis it was 'all or nothing'. This led to constant competition between Erendis and her husband. As David Louis Edelman notes, "Aldarion’s desire for the sea and Erendis’ stubborn resentment [could] not be reconciled."[3] Erendis' final years were tragic and sad: her daughter neglected her, Aldarion was away from Númenor most of the time, and her own bitterness isolated her. Númenor was changing around her; even her own daughter was in the end more Aldarion's daughter than hers in turn of mind. Ancalimë proved to be a competent Queen, but Aldarion's policies of aid to the Elves of Middle-earth were abandoned by her. It is said in Unfinished Tales that Erendis finally longed for Aldarion enough to overcome her bitterness, and she travelled to a haven where he was expected to return. All Tolkien writes of her then, though, is that she died there in the water.
G
Gimilkhâd (S.A. 3044-3243) was the younger son of Ar-Gimilzôr (the 23rd King of Númenor) and father of Ar-Pharazôn (the 25th King). A strong, harsh man, he led the King's Men during the reign of his brother Tar-Palantir.
H
Hallacar (S.A. 852–1211) was the youngest child of Hallatan, who was often the regent for Tar-Aldarion (the sixth King of Númenor), beginning in S.A. 883 or 884. Through his father's duties Hallacar became closely acquainted with Aldarion's immediate family. After S.A. 892 he began courting princess Ancalimë, Adarion's daughter and Heir; initially he disguised himself as a shepherd named Mámandil. They wedded in S.A. 1000, and had one child, Tar-Anárion, a son born in S.A. 1003,[4] but their marriage was largely unhappy. Hallacar's wife became the Ruling Queen in S.A. 1075, and he died in the second century of her reign. He is mentioned in the story of Aldarion and Erendis, published in Unfinished Tales.
Hallatan of Hyarastorni (b. S.A. 711) was the son and younger child of Cemendur son of Axantur. Hallatan had two children: Nessanië, daughter (b. S.A. 840); Hallacar, son (b. S.A. 852) and husband of Tar-Ancalimë. By S.A. 882 Hallatan was the Sheep-lord of Hyarastorni. At times, beginning in S.A. 883 or 884, he acted as regent for Tar-Aldarion,[5] Ancalimë's father.
Hatholdir was a descendant of the House of Hador. He was a close friend of Tar-Meneldur, the fifth king of Númenor, indicating he was a nobleman. This is further indicated by the marriage of Haltholdir's son Orchaldor to Tar-Meneldur's daughter Ailinel; this marriage took place before S.A. 799.
Henderch was a mariner from the Westlands and a companion of Aldarion. In S.A. 882 he returned to Númenor on Aldarion's ship Hirilondë, having been on a voyage to Middle-earth. He accompanied Aldarion and Ulbar to Emerië and Hyarastorni before travelling on to his home in the Westlands.
I
Îbal son of Ulbar of Hyarastorni, eager to be a mariner like his father. Îbal is first introduced in S.A. 880; he is described as a "young boy", but he is old enough to take solo errands to Emerië, where he is well-known, and has a strong appetite. He is last referred to in the later 880s as a boy inclined to shout excitedly.
Isildur
Isilmo was the younger brother of Queen Tar-Telperiën, the tenth monarch of Númenor. Tar-Telperiën refused to wed and had no children. Tar-Telperiën was succeeded by Isilmo's son Tar-Minastir in S.A. 1731, presumably because Isilmo was already dead or too old to take the throne.
Some fans have speculated that Isilmo might instead have received one of the Nine Rings and through it become the Lord of the Nazgûl. This would be theoretically possible, as Sauron captured the Rings about thirty-four years before Tar-Telperiën's death, at which time Isilmo might still have been alive. However, had Isilmo received a Great Ring it would have stopped his ageing, allowing him to outlive his sister and become King of Númenor rather than the position falling to his son.
M
Malantur, born S.A. 670, was a descendant of the royal family of Númenor. He was Tar-Aldarion's heir presumptive according to Númenórean Strict Agnatic Primogeniture (were Aldarion to die without leaving a son, prior to Númenor's Law of Succession changes, he would have been the most senior direct descendant of Elros Tar-Minyatur, regardless of who would actually succeed Aldarion). However, the changes to the law made by Aldarion left Malantur and his line with little hope of ascending the throne, since whatever the formulation of the law, there would be closer female or female-descended heirs to Aldarion and Ancalimë. They never reached the throne (though it is conceivable that some women in the line might have married Kings); there is a fair case for saying that they were the senior direct descendants, since the heir of Tar-Ancalimë was fathered by a junior member of the family (Hallacar).
Mámandil
Meneldil, the "last man to be born on Númenor"
N
Nolondil (b. S.A. 222) was the youngest child of Vardamir Nólimon, who was the nominal second King of Númenor. Nolondil had three children: Yávien (b. S.A. 371), daughter; Oromendil (b. S.A. 382), son; Axantur (b. S.A. 395), son.
Númendil was a Lord of Andúnië, succeeding his father upon his death. Little is known about him, though it can be assumed that he was a member of the Council of the Sceptre and an important lord in Númenor. His grandfather was Eärendur, the fifteenth Lord of Andúnië. He was probably the father of Amandil.
Núneth married Berengar of Emerië, and their daughter Erendis was born in S.A. 771. Erendis married Aldarion, the King's Heir, in S.A. 870. Núneth and her husband are last referred to in S.A. 879, when they were still living in Emerië.
O
Orchaldor, the son of Hatholdir of the House of Hador, married Ailinel, the elder daughter of Tar-Meneldur, the fifth King of Númenor. They had a son, Soronto, born S.A. 799.
S
Soronto (born S.A. 799) was a nobleman of the royal lineage of Númenor, the grandson of Tar-Meneldur and son of Ailinel, a sister of Tar-Aldarion. His father was Orchaldor, a descendant of the House of Hador. Soronto's name apparently means 'Eagle' or 'Eagle-friend'. Before the change in Númenor's law that turned the order of succession into cognatic primogeniture, Soronto may have been heir presumptive to the throne. Tolkien intended to write a story about Tar-Aldarion's daughter Tar-Ancalimë and her cousin Soronto, and how she married only to take away Soronto's chances at the throne. However this narrative never got further than a few notes which are gathered in Unfinished Tales. Ancalimë married Hallacar in S.A. 1000.
U
Ulbar originally a shepherd of Hyarastorni, but later a mariner and a companion of Aldarion. Father of Îbal. In S.A. 880, when his son was a boy who took an errand to Emerië, Ulbar was sailing on Aldarion's ship Hirilondë on one of its voyages to Middle-earth. Hirilondë returned to Númenor in S.A. 882, and Ulbar, accompanied by Aldarion, travelled to Emerië and then to Hyarastorni, where he was greeted by his wife and son.
V
Valandil of Andúnië (born S.A. 630) founded the line of the Lords of Andúnië in the western region of Andustar on Númenor. Valandil's father was Elatan of Andúnië, and his mother was Silmariën, a daughter of Tar-Elendil, the fourth King of Númenor. In S.A. 850 Valandil hosted the centenary of the Guild of Venturers in Andúnië.
Although Valandil's mother was the eldest child of the king, the laws of Númenor at that time would not allow her to succeed to the monarchy; accordingly Valandil and the subsequent Lords of Andúnië were not in line for royal succession. By the end of the Second Age, however, Valandil's descendants would become kings in Middle-earth, beginning with Elendil, the last Lord of Andúnië and first Dúnedain King of Arnor and Gondor. Valandil is also the name of the youngest son of Isildur and the grandson of Elendil who eventually became King of Arnor.
Valandil of Arnor son of Isildur.
Vëantur was the father of Almarian and a famous mariner of Númenor during the Second Age. He was Captain of the King's Ships under Tar-Elendil, the fourth King of Númenor. Almarien married Tar-Meneldur, at that time the heir of Tar-Elendil, and they had a son Aldarion (born S.A. 700).
Vëantur led the first Númenóreans to reach Middle-earth, landing in the Grey Havens in his ship Entulessë in S.A. 600. There he befriended the shipwright elf Círdan and the Elf King Gil-galad. Vëantur returned to Middle-earth on later voyages, developing an alliance between the Men of Númenor and the Elves of Lindon. On later expeditions he used the ship Númerráma. He taught his grandson Aldarion much about ships and the sea. When Aldarion was 25 years old (S.A. 725), Vëantur took him on his first voyage to Middle-earth. It was also Vëantur's last voyage; after their return to Númenor, Vëantur gave Númerráma to Aldarion, his first ship.
Y
Yávien (b. S.A. 371) was the oldest child and daughter of Nolondil, younger brother of Tar-Amandil (the third King of Númenor). She had two brothers, Oromendil and Axantur. The prefix yáv means fruit, so Yávien was probably named after Yavanna. In earlier versions Yávien was called Yávië.
Z
Zamîn an old country-woman of Emerië, where she helped raise Ancalimë. She is first introduced in S.A. 880, when already "old"; Ancalimë was then aged seven. Ancalimë was proclaimed the King's Heir in S.A. 892; some years later, when Ancalimë began receiving suitors, Zamîn continued to play a protective role.
