# List of Middle-earth characters

The following is a list of characters from J. R. R. Tolkien's Middle-earth legendarium. The list is for characters from Tolkien's writings only; for original characters from Peter Jackson's The Lord of the Rings film trilogy, please see List of original characters in The Lord of the Rings film series.

Hobbits are listed by their family names, not given names (for example, Frodo Baggins is under Baggins, Frodo), and rulers of Númenor are listed by their names without Tar- or Ar- prefixes (for example, Ar-Pharazôn is under Pharazôn, Ar-).

A
Aegnor
First Age elf.
Tar-Aldarion
King of Numenor.
Amandil
Second Age human.
Amras
First Age elf. Brother of Amrod.
Amrod
First Age elf. Brother of Amras.
Anárion
Second Age human.
Angrod
First Age elf.
Aragorn
Descendant of Isildur who was a principal figure in both the Company of the Ring and the War of the Ring. Became king over the reunited kingdoms of Gondor and Arnor.
Arien
An Ainur.
Arvedui
Last king of Arnor.
Arwen
Half-elven daughter of Elrond and Celebrían and wife of Aragorn.
B
Bilbo Baggins
A hobbit. Discovered the One Ring after its loss by Gollum.
Frodo Baggins
Nephew of Bilbo Baggins who bore the One Ring to its destruction in Mount Doom.
Balin
Dwarf companion of Thorin Oakenshield in The Hobbit. Slain during an attempt to retake Moria (Middle-earth).
Bard the Bowman
Man of Esgaroth who slew Smaug the dragon.
Beleg
First Age elf.
Beorn
Skin-changerr who resides in the region of Mirkwood.
Beregond and Bergil
Warriors of Gondor in the War of the Ring.
Beren
First Age human.
Tom Bombadil
Mysterious figure who aids the hobbits during their escape from The Shire.
Boromir
Warrior of Gondor. Member of the Company of the Ring but slain by orcs.
Brandir
First Age human.
Meriadoc Brandybuck
A hobbit and companion of Frodo Baggins. A member of the Company of the Ring.
Barliman Butterbur
Innkeeper in Bree.
C
Carcharoth
Wolf of the First Age.
Celeborn
Husband of Galadriel and important elf leader.
Celebrían
Daughter of Celeborn and Galadriel.
Celebrimbor
Forger of the Rings of Power.
Círdan
Elf leader. Shipwright and bearer of a Ring of Power.
Curufin
Elf and son of Celebrimbor.
D
Denethor
Steward of Gondor in the Lord of the Rings.
Dior Eluchíl
First Age Half-elven.
Durin
Name of multiple kings of the dwarves.
E
Eärendil
First Age half-elf who eventually became a legendary figure. He and his wife are key to the victory of good in the Silmarillion.
Eldarion
Son of Aragorn and succeeded him as king.
Elendil
Man of Numenor. Slain by Sauron shortly before the defeat of Sauron at the end of the Second Age.
Elrond
Powerful leader of the elves and ruler of Rivendell.
Elwing
First Age elf. Wife of Eärendil and key to the defeat of Morgoth.
Eöl
First Age elf.
Éomer
Warrior of Rohan and later king of that country.
Éowyn
Female member of the royal house of Rohan. Kills the Witch King of Angmar.
Erkenbrand
Military leader of Rohan at the Battle of the Hornburg.
F
Faramir
Soldier of Gondor.
Fëanor
First Age elf.
Finarfin
First Age elf.
Fingolfin
First Age elf.
Finrod Felagund
First Age elf.
Finwë
First king of the Noldor.
G
Galadriel
Queen of the Elves.
Samwise Gamgee
Loyal companion of Frodo Baggins who accompanies him to Mordor.
Gandalf
A wizard. A member of the Fellowship of the Ring. Killed in battle in Moria, but returns to play a leading role in the defeat of Sauron.
Ghân-buri-Ghân
Leader of the Drúedain in the Third Age.
Gil-galad
Second Age elf who led part of the Last Alliance of men and elves.
Gimli
Dwarf and member of the Fellowship of the Ring.
Glorfindel
A prominent elf warrior.
Gollum
Possessor of the One Ring until taken by Bilbo Baggins. Falls into the Crack of Doom after retaking the ring from Frodo Baggins.
Gothmog
Orc involved in the War of the Ring.
Grimbold
H
Haleth
Human chieftain of the First Age.
Halmir
Human warrior of the First Age.
Huor
First Age human.
Húrin
Human warrior of the First Age.
I
Idril
First Age elf.
Ilmarë
A Maiar.
Gildor Inglorion
Elf of Rivendell in the Third Age.
Isildur
Took the One Ring from Sauron at the end of the Second Age, but was later slain at the Disaster of the Gladden Fields.
L
Lalaith
Daughter of Húrin.
Legolas
An elf warrior. Member of the Fellowship of the Ring and a major character in The Lord of the Rings.
Lúthien
An ancient elf, predating the First Age.
M
Manwë
A Valar
Maedhros
First Age elf.
Farmer Maggot
Hobbit farmer who is aids Frodo Baggins, Samwise Gamgee, Peregrin Took, and Meriadoc Brandybuck during their escape from The Shire.
Maglor
First Age elf.
Morgoth
Original evil being in Tolkien's legendarium. Succeeded by Sauron.
Morwen
Wife of Húrin
N
Niënor Níniel
Daughter of Húrin and sister of Túrin.
Nimloth
First Age elf.
O
Thorin Oakenshield
Leader of the Dwarves. Led the company of dwarves that retook Erebor from the dragon Smaug in The Hobbit
Ohtar
Squire of Isildur.
Orodreth
First Age elf.
Ossë
A Maiar.
R
Radagast
A wizard best known for his relation to living things.
Rían
Mother of Tuor
S
Sador
Servant of Hurin.
Salmar
A Maiar.
Saruman
A wizard. Once a leader for good, he formed his own empire as a rival of Sauron and was defeated at the Battle of the Hornburg.
Sauron
The primary antagonist of The Lord of the Rings. He crafted the One Ring, and was destroyed upon its destruction at the end of the The Return of the King.
Shelob
Monstrous spider.
Smaug
A dragon and primary antagonist of The Hobbit. Slain by Bard the Bowman.
T
Théoden
King of Rohan (Middle-earth). Slain during the Battle of Pelennor Fields.
Théodred
A leader of Rohan (Middle-earth) and son of Théoden. Killed in battle during the events of The Two Towers.
Thingol
A First Age elf.
Thráin II
Dwarf king of Erebor.
Thranduil
Elven king of a dominion in Mirkwood.
Tilion
A Maiar.
Peregrin Took
A hobbit companion of Frodo Baggins. He was a member of the Fellowship of the Ring.
Treebeard
Leader of the Ents in The Return of the King.
Tuor
A First Age hero who was the ancestor of the Men of Numenor.
Tulkas
A Valar
Túrin Turambar
A First Age man who later became the subject of legends.
U
Ulmo
A Valar
Ungoliant
Monstrous spider. Ancestor of the Great Spiders and of Shelob.
V
Varda
A Valar.
Voronwë
First Age Elf warrior.
W
Watcher in the Water
A mysterious aquatic creature who lives in a pool guarding the gates of Moria.
Witch-king of Angmar
One of the Ringwraiths. He controlled the Kingdom of Angmar.
Gríma Wormtongue
An ally of Saruman who gave false advice to Theoden, King of Rohan (Middle-earth)
