# Years of the Trees

Shortly after the destruction of the Two Lamps and the kingdom of [Almaren](),
the Valar abandoned Middle-earth and moved to the continent of [Aman](). There
they built their Second Kingdom, [Valinor](). Yavanna made the Two Trees, named
Telperion (the silver tree) and Laurelin (the golden tree) in the land of
Valinor. The Trees illuminated Valinor, leaving Middle-earth in darkness lit
only by stars. The Years of the Trees were contemporary with Middle-earth's
Sleep of Yavanna (recalled by Treebeard as the Great Darkness).

The Years of the Trees were divided into two epochs in Valinor. The first ten
Ages, known as the **Years of Bliss**, saw peace and prosperity in Valinor. The
Eagles, the Ents and the Dwarves were conceived by Manwë, Yavanna, and Aulë
respectively, but placed into slumber until after the awakening of the Elves.
The next ten Ages, called the **Noontide of the Blessed**, saw Varda rekindling
the stars above Middle-earth. This was the first time after the Years of the
Lamps that Middle-earth was illuminated. The first Elves awoke in [Cuiviénen]()
in the middle of Middle-earth, marking the start of the First Age of the
Children of Ilúvatar, and were soon approached by the Enemy Melkor who hoped to
enslave them. Learning of this, the Valar and the Maiar came into Middle-earth
and, in the **War of the Powers** (also called the **Battle of the Powers**),
defeated Melkor and brought him captive to Valinor. This began the period of
the **Peace of Arda**.

After the War of the Powers, Oromë of the Valar summoned the Elves to come to
Aman. Many of the Elves were persuaded to go with Oromë on the Great Journey
westwards towards Aman. Along the journey several groups of Elves tarried,
notably the Nandor and the Sindar. The three clans that arrived at Aman were
the Vanyar, Noldor and the Teleri. They made their home in Eldamar. After
Melkor appeared to repent and was released after his servitude of three Ages,
he sowed great discord among the Elves, and stirred up rivalry between the
Noldorin King Finwë's two sons Fëanor and Fingolfin. With the help of
Ungoliant, he slew Finwë and stole the Silmarils, three gems crafted by Fëanor
that contained light of the Two Trees, from his vault, and destroyed the Trees
of the Valar. The world was then dark, save for the faint starlight.

Bitter at the Valar's inactivity, Fëanor and his house left to pursue Melkor,
cursing him with the name "Morgoth". While his brother Finarfin chose to stay
in Valinor, a larger host led by Fingolfin followed Fëanor. They reached
[Alqualondë](), the port-city of the Teleri, who forbade them from taking their
ships for the journey to Middle-earth. The first Kinslaying thus ensued, and a
curse was put on the house of the Noldor forever. Fëanor's host sailed on the
boats, leaving Fingolfin's host behind—who crossed over to Middle-earth on the
[Helcaraxë]() or Grinding Ice in the far north, losing many. The War of the
Great Jewels followed, and lasted until the end of the First Age. Meanwhile,
the Valar took the last living fruit of Laurelin and the last living flower of
Telperion and used them to create the Moon and Sun, which remained a part of
Arda, but were separate from Ambar (the world). The first rising of the sun
over Ambar heralded the end of the Years of the Trees, and the start of the
Years of the Sun, which last to the present day.

### Years of the Sun

In the fiction of J. R. R. Tolkien, the Years of the Sun were the last of the
three great time-periods of Arda, together with the Years of the Lamps and the
Years of the Trees. They began with the first sunrise in conjunction with the
return of the Noldor to Middle-earth, and last until the present day. The Years
of the Sun began towards the end of the First Age of the Children of Ilúvatar
and continued through the Second, Third, and part of the Fourth in Tolkien's
stories. Tolkien estimated that modern times would correspond to the sixth or
seventh age.

## Ages of the Children of Ilúvatar

The First Age of the Children of Ilúvatar, or Eruhíni, began during the Years
of the Trees when the Elves awoke in Cuiviénen in the middle-east of
Middle-earth. This marked the start of the years when the Children of Ilúvatar
were active in Middle-earth. Later in the First Age the second kindred, humans,
also awoke.

In some texts Tolkien referred to the 'First Age of Middle-earth' or the 'First
Age of the World' rather than the 'First Age of the Children of Ilúvatar'.
These variations had earlier starting points, extending the First Age back to
the creation of [Arda](), but consistently ended with Morgoth's defeat in
[Beleriand]().

Tolkien wrote that the later Ages lasted about 3,000 years, though this
duration was not fixed and he felt that the Ages 'sped up' over time. Each
ended following the completion of some major event in the history of the
Children of Ilúvatar.

The terms 'First Age of the Sun' and 'Ages of the Sun' are commonly used by
many fans, but do not appear anywhere in Tolkien's writings. The 'First Age of
the Sun' in this conception is held to begin with the first rising of the Sun
and continue until Morgoth's defeat nearly 600 years later. While this is at
odds with Tolkien's statements that the First Age was the longest by far it is
a common misapprehension because the subsequent ages all took place entirely
during the Years of the Sun.

