Greyhawk (буквально англ. Серый Ястреб), или World of Greyhawk (Мир Грейхока)
— вымышленный мир, созданный как игровой сеттинг для системы Dungeons &
Dragons.

Грейхок, придуманный Гэри Гайгэксом, стал вторым по времени выхода сеттингом
для D&D после Блэкмура Дэйва Арнесона и существовал с 1972 г. по настоящее
время. Этот мир начался всего лишь с одного подземелья, но подземелье быстро
превратилось в сложное и многоуровневое, затем появился город Грейхок, давший
название всему миру, а затем родился и мир Орт. Сеттинг описан в большом
количестве книг правил и приключений, издававшихся компаниями TSR и Wizards of
the Coast; в нём также происходило действие проводимой RPGA в 2000-08 гг.
ролевой многопользовательской настольной кампании Living Greyhawk.

The first published setting for D&D, created by D&D co-author Gary Gygax.
Greyhawk is Gygax's original campaign, one which eventually turned into an
official game supplement and was greatly expanded upon with many supplements
throughout the 1970s and 1980s. Many of the setting's concepts were based on
ideas generated during Gary Gygax's D&D gaming sessions. Several characters in
the setting were also based on characters created by Gygax's gaming partners.
Greyhawk eventually became the official Dungeons & Dragons world for the third
edition of D&D.

Oerth (the name of the world where Greyhawk campaigns take place) is a
"standard" medieval fantasy world, similar in many ways to the Forgotten
Realms campaign, but overall darker in tone, closer to a sword and sorcery
scenario. The first official edition of the campaign was published in 1980,
although sections of it had appeared in articles published by the author.

The campaign itself began as a dungeon and then expanded into an entire
continent (Oerik) and eventually other added areas. In general, Oerth is an
action-packed world which seems to be gradually descending into savagery and
chaos and continually on the verge of war. It is originally centered on the
region of Flanaess, whose fictional history has parallels with that of ancient
and medieval Europe - a powerful Oeridian Empire has pushed away barbarian
tribes and has become a decadent, evil state, while smaller states, kingdoms
and tribes compete for power amidst wildlands populated by monsters, magic and
fantastical creatures.

Greyhawk was also the "default" setting for the 3rd Edition ruleset of D&D
(that is, the rulebooks are written assuming the players are campaigning in
the Greyhawk setting) but supplements are no longer actively published and the
campaign is no longer officially supported.
