# First Age

Main article: First Age

The First Age of the Children of Ilúvatar began during the Years of the Trees
when the Elves awoke at Cuiviénen, and hence the events mentioned above under
Years of the Trees overlap with the beginning of the First Age.

Having crossed into Middle-earth, Fëanor was soon lost in an attack on
Morgoth's Balrogs — but his sons survived, and founded realms, as did the
followers of Fingolfin, who reached Beleriand after Fëanor's death.

The Noldor for a time besieged Morgoth's stronghold of Angband, resulting in
the Long Peace. This Peace lasted hundreds of years; during which time Men
arrived over the Blue Mountains. But the peace was not to last; and one by one
the kingdoms — even the hidden ones of [Gondolin]() and [Doriath]() — fell. The
initial battle that allowed Morgoth's forces to break free of the **Siege of
Angband** was aptly named [Dagor Bragollach](), or **The Battle of Sudden
Flame**. Morgoth issued flames and lava from Angband which enveloped the
surrounding area. A mighty force was then sent forth to break their centuries
long siege.

At the end of the age, all that remained of free Elves and Men in Beleriand was
a settlement at the mouth of the River Sirion and another settlement on the
Isle of Balar. Eärendil had possession of a Silmaril, which his wife Elwing's
ancestors Beren and Lúthien had taken from Morgoth. But the Fëanorians had a
claim on the Silmaril still and so there was another Kinslaying. Eärendil and
Elwing took the Silmaril across the Great Sea, to beg the Valar for aid against
Morgoth.

They responded. A great battle, the War of Wrath, ensued. Melkor was exiled
into the Void; and most of his works were destroyed. This came at a terrible
cost, as most of Beleriand itself was sunk.
