# 31 век

*   3000
    *   Март
        *   Возвращение Мусорного Кома Старого Нью-Йорка
*   3017
    *   Ноябрь
        *   Возвращение мыльной оперы "Все Мои Шестеренки" в виде аудио
            подкаста


3000

Fry is awakened after being frozen for 1 000 years.

Vergon 6 implodes as a result of DOOP's mining operations.

The Cruiseship Titanic is sucked into a black hole

Richard Nixon's head becomes the President of Earth.
January
(1st) Fry, Leela, and Bender are hired by Professor Hubert J. Farnsworth, owner of Planet Express (1ACV01).
(2nd or 3rd) The new crew's first mission to the moon (1ACV02)
February
(ca. 1st) Fry expected to find out where the owls are coming from and to find out who has been leaving out food
Fry moves out of Planet Express and moves in with Bender (1ACV03).
April
(before the 13th) Mom captures the Nibblonians for her Dark Matter farm in Alaska (BG).
(13th) – Vergon 6 implodes; Leela rescues Nibbler and has sex with Zapp Brannigan (1ACV04, BG).
April — August
Bender gains a brief period of fame on Chapek 9, until Fry and Leela convinces him to come with them back to Earth (1ACV05).
Fry briefly becomes a billionaire, but is robbed of his money by Mom's sons (1ACV06).
Fry briefly becomes the Emperor of the planet Trisol (1ACV07).
Garbage ball launched in 2052 returns and threatens to hit New New York City (1ACV08).
Bender joins Robotology and is sent to Robot Hell after sinning, however, a rescue mission by Fry and Leela gets him out again (1ACV09).
Cruise spaceship Titanic sucked into black hole (1ACV10).
August — November
Farnsworth's prize experiment, Guenter, ends in failure after deciding that he would rather be enrolled at a business school (1ACV11).
(8 September) Labor Day – Earth invaded by Omicronians; Earth President McNeal disintegrated (1ACV12).
Fry wins the ticket to the Slurm Factory and discovers the truth of Slurm (1ACV13).
Bender becomes for a brief period of time attached to Leela's emotions (2ACV01).
The dreaded El Chupanibre is sent into the Sub-sewer by Bender (2ACV01).
Zapp Brannigan accidentally destroys new DOOP headquarters (2ACV02).
November — December
November – Richard Nixon's head elected President of Earth (2ACV03).
December (near Xmas) – Robot Santa returns once more to wreck havoc on Earth, however, the Planet Express crew manages to send him back before he can get on with his havoc (2ACV04).
3001

Cubert Farnsworth is released from his cloning tank

The second Omicronian invasion of Earth and the death of Free Waterfall Jr.
February — March
Shortly before 14 February (Valentine's Day) Fry, Amy and Zoidberg get in a terrible car crash on Europa, Fry's head is grafted to Amy's body (2ACV07).
Bender joins the Ultimate Robot Fighting League (2ACV08).
April
(9th) Cubert Farnsworth removed from cloning tank; designated Prof. Farnsworth's successor (2ACV10).
April — December
Hermes is put on paid vacation by Morgan Proctor, his temporary replacement after his attempts of promotion to grade 35 are ruined. He sorts out the Master IN Pile and gets demoted 2 grades for finishing 2 seconds early; he then gets promoted to grade 37 for noticing an error in Proctor's paperwork (2ACV11).
The Planet Express crew rediscover the lost underwater city of Atlanta (2ACV12).
Mother's Day – Earth robots revolt at Mom's instigation; called off the next morning.
Earth again invaded by Omicronians after their larva become major fast food sensation; Free Waterfall Jr. eaten.
The Professor invents the What-If Machine and later invents the Fing-Longer.
Earth successfully invades Spheron 1.
Bender's uncle Vladimir dies. Were-car curse is broken.
Fry's ex-girlfriend Michelle unfrozen.
Pauly Shore unfrozen for the 1000 year anniversary of Jury Duty II: Trouble on the Hubble
Zapp Brannigan crashes a space-going restaurant onto the Planet Amazonia
New New York v. Santa Bender case held. Santa Bender was to be executed at sundown.
3002
January — July
Massive dark matter spill on the Plutonian penguin refuge. Free Waterfall, Sr. eaten by penguins.
Earth invaded by the Brain Spawn; defeated by Fry and the Nibblonians.
Dr. Zoidberg and Harold Zoid make the movie The Magnificent Three.
Martian natives kidnap Amy Wong. She is later released when the worthless "bead" their ancestors traded the planet for is revealed to be a valuable, enormous diamond. The Martians leave Mars and buy a nicer planet.
Around 15 May, New New York v. Fry and Bender case held. Both Fry and Bender are sent to the HAL Institute for Criminally Insane Robots.
Bend-Aid benefit concert for broken robots held in San Francisco.
Universe threatened by "time skips;" Prof. Farnsworth and the Globetrotters create a black hole to absorb damaging time radiation.
August
The What-If Machine is fine tuned.
(11th) Omicronians invade Earth yet again.
September
(21st) the Planet Express Crew travel back in time to Roswell, New Mexico in 1947.
(c. 22nd) Bender, Fry, Leela, and the Professor dig up Bender's head, which was buried for 1,055 years.
September — December
Three-time Grammy winner and teen singer Wendy found dead in her bathtub at the age of 18
Star Trek convention held on forbidden planet Omega 3; Welshie killed.
3003

Leela discovers her true origins

Decapodians invade Earth

Fry makes a deadly deal with the Robot Devil
January — February
Kif and Leela's offspring are born.
Turanga Leela finds out her true origins.
February
(14th) (Valentine's Day) Bender dates the ship, dumps it, the ship doesn't take the break-up well and almost crashes itself into a quasar. The crew dumps their cargo of candy hearts into the quasar causing a mystical love radiation that spreads across the universe destroying many, many planets, including two gangster planets and a cowboy world.
February — December
Earth moved further from the sun to combat global warming, making the year one week longer– President Richard Nixon declares it Robot Party Week; Professor Farnsworth presented with the Polluting Medal of Pollution.
Earth v. Zoidberg case held. Zoidberg sentenced to death.
Decapodians invade Earth, briefly enslave humanity. Old Man Waterfall crushed.
Fry finds the fossilized remains of his dog, Seymour.
Zapp v. Fry, Bender and Leela case held. The case never reached a verdict.
Roboticon 3003 held in New New York; the advanced Robot 1-X model unveiled.
3004 — 3006
3004
Fry and the Nibblonians defeat the Brain Spawn permanently by banishing them to an alternate pocket dimension.
Earth conquers the Spiderians of Tarantulon 6; Nixon's head refunds everyone $300.
The 3004 Olympics are held on Earth. Hermes Conrad competes for Jamaica in the five hundred meter limbo but is disqualified. Bender wins five gold medals in various fembots' bending events competing for the fictitious Grand Duchy of Robonia under the name Coilette.
Fry makes a deal with the Robot Devil and becomes a notable holophonor star. However, his holophonor opera Leela: Orphan of the Stars, while performed with great success in the first act, flops as a result of the Robot Devil's interference.
3005 – The 'Brainless Drones' who run the Box Network cancel Planet Express's license to make deliveries.
3007

The Battle for Earth, 3007.
November — December
The people who cancelled Planet Express's license are fired for incompetence and then beaten up. Most die from their injuries and are ground into a pink powder used for various reasons. Planet Express are allowed back on the air. Hermes Conrad is decapitated and put into a jar.
Nudist alien scammers take control of Planet Express and eventually Earth and send Bender back in time to steal Earth's treasures.
Fry travels back in time to New York in 2000 to resume his old life
Leela falls in love with Lars Fillmore and nearly marries him. The wedding is called off after Hermes is decapitated again.
The population of Earth is evicted by the scammers. The crew go to Neptune, where they plan to fight back with Robot Santa Claus, Chanukah Zombie, and Kwanzaa-bot.
Battle for Earth, 3007 occurs. Earthicans win, thanks to Bender. Fleb and Schlump die.

The Anomaly
3008
January — December
Lars and Nudar are killed, afterwards Lars is revealed to be a time paradox duplicate of Fry. Lars is buried at Orbiting Meadows.
Bender is ordered to go back in time to put the tattoo on Fry's butt in the first place, but due to Bender's illogical screw up of time, a rip in space is created.
A scientific conference is held about the Anomaly.
Bender becomes a member of the League of Robots, eventually becoming its leader.
Yivo begins forcing shklis tentacles through the Anomaly and mates with everyone in the universe, while previous versions of Fry, Bender and the Professor watch.
Yivo takes everyone in the universe out on a date and later proposes, causing everyone on Earth to move onto shkler.
Bender and his army drag Yivo into their universe to save humanity.
Yivo breaks up with humanity and leaves for shklis universe through the Anomaly, which closes forever.

Cornwood.
Dark Matter prices tripled and are $9.99 per ball. Mombil profits greatly.
Space Demolition Derby held. Planet Express ship wins.
Bender becomes insane from playing Dungeons & Dragons.
Professor Farnsworth infiltrates Mom's dark matter mine in Alaska to get revenge for being dumped by making dark matter useless as fuel, with the Anti-backwards crystal.
Cornwood is created and destroyed.
All dark matter everywhere is useless as fuel.
Professor Farnsworth harnesses Nibblonians as a temporary form of transportation.
The Planet Express ship is (and presumably other spacecraft are) converted to run on Whale Oil.
3009

The Wormhole.
January — December
Mars Vegas was destroyed.
New Mars Vegas was built.
New member Leela and the other Feministas causing chaos with their protests and sabotages, including the murder of the then vice-president Agnew.
3009 Universal Poker Championship was held in New Mars Vegas. Bender wins with 5 kings due to the King of Beers card being accidentally mixed in with the deck.
Earth v. Feministas case was held resulting in the Feministas being put away.
Bender helps the Feministas escape from Maxi-Padlock.
Implosion of the Violet Dwarf Star was stopped by the Feministas.
The Violet Dwarf Star is revealed to be an Encyclopod egg, which later hatches and defeats the last known Dark One. End of the Evolutionary arms race. Green Age begins.
The Planet Express crew, Fry, Leela, Bender, Scruffy, Professor Farnsworth, Hermes, LaBarbara Conrad, Amy, Kif, Zoidberg (and possibly Nibbler), go through a wormhole.
3010

The crew dies and are rebirthed (6ACV01).

The Forward time machine (6ACV07).

Robot dinosaurs fight (6ACV09).

Leela leads the Devolution Revolution (6ACV12).
June
The Planet Express crew and the Nimbus exit the Wormhole appearing in front of Earth and they crash land. Farnsworth brings the entire Planet Express crew, including Kif, LaBarbara, and Zapp back to life (6ACV01).
July
Planet XXX, Poopiter, and #!@€$!#%& are destroyed by the V-GINY (6ACV02).
The eyePhone came out and Mom zombified many of the buyers so they bought the next version of it (6ACV03).
Proposition ∞ passes and legalizes robosexual marriage (6ACV04).
The Professor and Fry discover Leonardo da Vinci's big secret (6ACV05).
Leonardo da Vinci is killed (6ACV05).
Bender finds out about his manufacturing defect and that he is not immortal like he thought. He and Hermes go on a search for Inspector #5, but ultimately gives up (6ACV06).
All information, both virtual and physical, about Inspector #5 is lost from the Central Bureaucracy (6ACV06).
The Professor invents a Forward time machine. However, before he, Fry and Bender could test it, all three of them are crushed and replaced by their time paradox duplicates, due to them having travelled so far forward in time when they tested it that they passed the end of the universe and ended up back at the beginning(6ACV07).
August
Earth briefly has its rotational energy stolen by Professor Morris Katz and other cats from Thuban 9. However, Amy Wong comes up with an idea to get the energy back by making the Earth rotate in the opposite direction that it was rotating before (6ACV08).
Amy Wong gets her doctorate in Applied Physics (6ACV08).
Professor Farnsworth discovers the fossilized skull of a missing link in the evolutionary chain of humans and names it Homo farnsworth. However, everybody at the museum where it is on display misinterpret it as proof that evolution is false (6ACV09).
The Professor gets upset with the ignorance of everybody on Earth and travels to a distant planetoid where he accidentally creates a new evolutionary chain of robotic lifeforms out of Nanobots that he invented. He and most of the crew stay there for about three days, although the robots percieve it as millions of years, and get arrested for crimes against science. The trial ends when the robots evolve some more and they are allowed to go home (6ACV09).
Pofessor Farnsworth invents The Mind-Switcher and a bunch of people briefly switch minds before realising that those who once had changed never can change back. With a mathematical theorem, the Globetrotters finally realise how to switch everything back to normal (6ACV10).
The crew go to the 3010 Comic-Con Intergalactic (6ACV11).
Matt Groening and David X. Cohen's new show, Futurella is canceled.
Lrrr tries to take over Earth, but ends up losing a costume contest. Bender won with his Leela costume.
Lrrr is then kicked out of the house by his wife, Ndnd and is forced to live at Planet Express. After getting horn extensions and having a brief affair with Grrrl, he gets Orson Welles' head to help him fake an invasion of Earth, so Ndnd will take him back. However, the fake becomes too good and Lrrr ends up enslaving humanity. He eventually confesses to Ndnd, and they leave after taking part in Rrrmrrrmrrrfrrrmrrr or Consequences (6ACV11).
September
Planet Express makes their 100th delivery (a nitroglycerin soufflé) to Mrs. Astor. During the delivery, Fry accidentally reveals that Leela is a mutant and she is banished to the sewers; for harboring her, the entire crew, except for Bender, get sent there with her.
Leela unites the mutants of New New York's sewers and they rebel against the surface in the Devolution Revolution. In the end, mutants are allowed to be seen on the surface, and Mrs. Astor is reunited with her husband who had mutated during the sinking of the Land Titanic (6ACV12).
3011

The Planet Express crew discovers a four-dimensional whale in the Bermuda Tetrahedron (6ACV15).

Bender dies, but is shortly thereafter brought back to life (6ACV19).

The Planet Express crew forms Plan Am, a commercial airline (6ACV20).

Leela receives a Slurmee for her show (6ACV21).
June
The Robot Mafia attend a wedding. Planet Express deliver a new set of clamps to Clamps.
Bender sneaks in and falls in love with Bella. As they make out, he witnesses the mafia maul Calculon.
Bender snitches on the mafia to the Earth Bureau of Investigation resulting in E.B.I. v. Donbot at the Battery Park Integrated Circuit Court. The Donbot wins when Calculon claims his injuries were self-inflicted, and he is released knowing that Bender snitched on him.
Bender is taken into a witness relocation program by the E.B.I. Clamps replaces him him at Planet Express, in order to find and clamp Bender.
Planet Express makes a delivery of rope to the Moon. They find someone who looks like Bender who calls himself Billy West.
Clamps tries to kill Billy, but he is defeated by Zoidberg. Despite this, Billy is then shot and killed by Bella.
The crew return home and find out that Billy wasn't actually Bender, who had actually been relocated to the pizzeria across the street. He rejoins the company.
50th Anniversary of the loss of the First Planet Express Crew. The Current Crew is sent on a mission to retrieve a monument for a memorial party from Xenotaph 3.
Leela's actions cause the Planet Express Ship to be destroyed by a Four-dimensional space whale and the crew to be eaten, sans Dr. John A. Zoidberg who returns to Earth.
Leela pilots the space whale back to Earth with her obsession to completing her delivery. The First Planet Express crew is returned to Earth safely, without aging a day, except for Lando Tucker.
July
Philip J. Fry joins the New New York Police Department.
He stops Pickles' plan to steal the Maltese Liquor, and arrest him.
He is fired from the force for tipping off Bender about his future heist.
The Professor invents the Banach-Tarski Dupla-Shrinker, and Bender accidentally creates millions of duplicates that threaten to destroy Earth (6ACV17).
The duplicates leave Earth forever (6ACV17).
The symptoms of Professor Hubert J. Farnsworth's Yetiism start taking effect. However, he thinks it is actually Hypermalaria and asks Dr. John A. Zoidberg to fulfill their pact and mercy kill him.
Zoidberg is caught in the act by the Planet Express Crew and imprisoned. He then finds out from a white hair that the Professor actually has Yetiism and runs to Mom to get the Yeti head he needs to cure the Professor.
The Professor explains his pact to the crew and they decide to replace Zoidberg and kill him with a Murdolater.
Zoidberg returns and cures the Professor just as he starts to turn into a yeti and be killed by the Murdolater. They celebrate with tanning.
The 3011 Parade Day is held (6ACV19).
Bender is murdered by Lynn, a suicide booth, and ends up as a robot ghost in limbo (6ACV19).
Fry has a heart attack and temporarily moves to the Amish homeworld. He returns to New New York after a near-death experience (6ACV19).
Bender makes Robot God return him to Earth again (6ACV19).
August
Planet Express goes bankrupt, and the company is turned into a commercial airline. The first flight unfortunately crash land on an uncharted planet, and after finally coming home, Plan Am is closed down (6ACV20).
Leela tries to tell the orphans at the Cookieville Minimum-Security Orphanarium a story, but fails to impress them. She sets out to write a better one.
She returns later with an amazing story about the Humplings from a world called Rumbledy-Hump. The kids, and Abner Doubledeal love it. Abner gets Leela to sign a coupon to turn the Humplings into a new kids show.
They film the first episode with Planet Express acting as the Humplings. It gets fantastic ratings, and the show because extremely popular.
Leela wins a Slurmee, a Peabody Junior, and two training Emmys for Rumbledy-Hump.
Bender finds out that Leela didn't actually write the episodes herself, but was rather writing down the adventures of aliens called Humplings in a planet called Rumbledy-Hump. After being blackmailed by Bender for her secret, Leela confesses to plagiarism to everyone and shows them the real Humplings.
Abner revamps the show by adopting the orphans as the filming crew, and makes it a reality show starring the Humplings.
Fry takes care of a Bone Vampire egg from a Local Farmer's Market. It hatches into Mr. Peppy.
The crew return Mr. Peppy to the Doohan 6.
At The Drunken Sniper they meet Angus McZongo and hear tales about how the bone vampires attacked their livestock and McZongo killed them all. Leela convinces McZongo to wait a few days before hunting down Mr. Peppy. Over the night, McZongo dresses up as a bone vampire and debones some livestock, framing Mr. Peppy, so that he can kill it and be a hero.
After Leela is attacked by McZongo in his costume, Fry decides to kill Mr. Peppy himself. They find out about McZongo's scheme. They also find out that the real Mr. Peppy was killing livestock, but the villagers decide to let him live for productivity reasons.
Fry invites the rest of Planet Express for a party at his night job at the Hall of Presidents at the Head Museum.
Zoidberg drinks some H2OGfat from Lyndon Johnson's head, which sends him, along with Professor Farnsworth and Dr. Amy Wong, back to the 1960s. They then return back to 3011 after a moment.
Fry licks Herbert Hoover's head which sends him, along with Bender, Leela and Hermes back to Hoover's time. They return with a little person in Bender's cavity.
The Professor realizes that this is caused by the Opal found in the jar juice. He names these Head trips the "Farnsworth Effect".
Professor Farnsworth learns that one of his ancestors, David Farnsworth was a traitor working for the British from George Washington's head. He pours the last remaining supply of Opal into his jar and licks him, sending him, Fry, Bender and Leela back to 1775.
The four return to find themselves in an alternate timeline where the American Revolutionary War was won by the British, due to their meddling in time. The professor steals an opal crystal from the Queen of England, America, and Two Parking Spaces in Tokyo, the four pour it in David Farnsworth's head jar, and they go back to prevent themselves from changing history. They succeed, with the only exception being the Gadsden flag being replaced with a painting of Bender and the caption "Bite my shiny metal ass".
November
The Manhattan common cold outbreak. Vaccine invented by Farnsworth.
Bender is overclocked by Cubert J. Farnsworth, gaining godlike powers. Mom finds out and sues.
Mom v. Farnsworth takes place. Mom drops the charges, but Bender is reset to his normal conditions.
Turanga Leela leaves Planet Express, and later returns.
3012
Unknown date
Ben is born (7ACV01).
Predicted doomsday (7ACV02).
The Earth presidential election of 3012 takes place, and Richard Nixon's head emerges victorious (7ACV03).
Calculon dies after drinking a vial of food coloring in an acting competition against Langdon Cobb (7ACV04).
Zapp and Admiral Chew negotiate the Treaty of Table 7 (7ACV05).
29 September
Senator Chris Travers is born.
3013 — 3099
3013
Fry and Leela freeze time and get married, Professor Farnsworth eventually resets time to the moment before he created the time button (7ACV26).
3014
A time capsule from 2014 is opened, unleashing a group of mutants conceived from Bart Simpson's DNA, the Planet Express crew and the Simpson family eventually send them out into space (SABF16).
3023
Kif and Leela's offspring crawl back onto land as children.
3026
Teleportation is invented, according to that guy from the future (6ACV20).
3028
Robot Uprising occurs as result of Nixon's re-election in 3012.
Chris Travers, 15, is sent to prevent Nixon's re-election in 3012.

----

*   2997-3008
    *   Подъем
*   3009-3020
    *   Пробуждение
*   3021-3032
    *   Спад

----

*   Голова Ричарда Никсона была избрана президентом Земли вместе со своим
    вице-президентом, обезглавленным телом Спиро Агнью
*   Вторжение [Омикронцев]()
*   Обнаружен затонувший город Атланта, штат Джорджия.
*   Атака Порождений Мозга в 3002.
*   Еще одно вторжение Омикронийцев произошло в 3002 году
*   В 3003 году вторглись декаподийцы
*   В 3004 одержали окончательную и решительную победу над Порождениями
    Мозга
