Dark Sun (англ. Тёмное Солнце) — один из сеттингов, созданных фирмой TSR для
ролевой игры Dungeons & Dragons.

Эта игровая вселенная не самая популярная, зато одна из самых колоритных и
своеобразных. По этому миру было выпущено 32 игровых продукта для AD&D 2,
написано 13 романов, опубликовано более 50 статей в журналах «Dragon»,
«Dungeon» и «Polyhedron», а также выпущено три компьютерных игры.

Released by TSR in 1991, Dark Sun diverges from the tone of "conventional"
medieval fantasy, drawing heavy inspiration from novels like Dune and the
Barsoom series. The campaign is set on the harsh desert world of Athas - once
a lush planet teeming with life, it has since been stripped of its fertility
by uncontrolled use of defiling magic and is now a desolate and savage place
where civilization has retreated to city-states controlled by god-like
Sorcerer-Kings.

Psionics are a dominant aspect of the setting and are as commonplace as magic
in other D&D settings - native / latent psionic abilities are commonly found
in individuals of all humanoid races and their powers are respected. Religion
and divine magic is based on the worship of elemental forces, spirits or the
Sorcerer-Kings themselves - the old gods have long abandoned the world.

Wizards and arcane spellcasters, on the other hand, are rarer and usually
discriminated against, mainly because most of them are "defilers" who drain
life force from the environment to power their magic. However, a small
underground minority of magicians called "preservers" work to maintain life
and ultimately restore the primeval lushness.

Playable humanoid races in Athas include the Thri-Kreen (mantis people) and
Half-Giants, as well as warped variants of races found in other conventional
fantasy settings: humans, the dominant race in most of known Athas, appear to
be tougher than in other worlds; elves are nomadic desert dwellers and
long-distance runners; halflings are depicted as savage jungle cannibals.

These elements, combined with a post-apocalyptic desert setting and the alien
feel of Athas' native cultures, give Dark Sun a unique flavor among the
various D&D worlds. As of fourth edition, Dark Sun is again an officially
supported campaign setting. The first three releases for the 4th edition of
D&D for the setting were released on August 17, 2010 and include the Dark Sun
Campaign Setting, Dark Sun Creature Catalog, and the Marauders of the Dune Sea
adventure.
