# History of Arda

In J. R. R. Tolkien's legendarium, the history of the fictional universe of Eä
began when the Ainur entered Arda, following the creation events in the
Ainulindalë and long ages of labour throughout Eä, the universe. Time from that
point was measured using Valian Years, though the subsequent history of Arda
was divided into three time periods using different years, known as the Years
of the Lamps, the Years of the Trees and the Years of the Sun. A separate,
overlapping chronology divides the history into 'Ages of the Children of
Ilúvatar'. The first such Age began with the Awakening of the Elves during the
Years of the Trees and continued for the first six centuries of the Years of
the Sun. All the subsequent Ages took place during the Years of the Sun. Most
Middle-earth stories take place in the first three Ages of the Children of
Ilúvatar.

## Music of the Ainur

The supreme deity of Tolkien's universe is called Eru Ilúvatar. In the
beginning, Ilúvatar created spirits named the Ainur from his thoughts, and some
were considered brothers or sisters. Ilúvatar made divine music with them.
Melkor, who was then the most powerful of the Ainur, broke the harmony of the
music, until Ilúvatar began first a second theme, and then a third theme, which
the Ainur could not comprehend since they were not the source of it. The
essence of their song symbolized the history of the whole universe and the
Children of Ilúvatar that were to dwell in it—the Men and the Elves.

Then Ilúvatar created Eä, which means "to be," the universe itself, and formed
within it Arda, the Earth, "globed within the void": the world together with
the three airs is set apart from Avakúma, the "void" without. The first 15 of
the Ainur that descended to Arda, and the most powerful ones, were called
Valar, and the Ainur of lesser might that came with them were called Maiar.

## Valian Years

In the fictional works of J. R. R. Tolkien, the Valian Years are used to
measure the passage of time after the arrival of the Ainur in Arda. This
definition of a year, named for the Valar, continued to be used during periods
that used different definitions of a year, such as the Years of the Lamps, the
Years of the Trees, and the Years of the Sun. The Valian years continued to be
measured in Aman after the first sunrise, but Tolkien provided no dates for
events in Aman after that point. The account in Valian years is generally not
used when describing the events of Beleriand and Middle-earth.

In the 1930s and 40s Tolkien used a figure which fluctuated slightly around ten
before settling on 9.582 solar years in each Valian year. However, in the 1950s
Tolkien decided to use a much greater value of 144 solar years per Valian year,
and included this figure in The Lord of the Rings appendices as the length of
the elven year (the yen).

This new figure elongates the established timeline: The Flight of the Noldor
took 5 Valian Years (~50 of our years); with the new figure this would be
'translated' into ~700 of our years. Some commenters suggest that these new
figures would be too long if applied directly to the existing dates and
therefore the new definition is a wholly different measure than the one used in
the timeline and cannot be applied directly. In contrast, Tolkien described
time as having flowed more slowly in Aman, such that a Valian year there would
'feel' like the passage of a single solar year in Middle-earth despite being
much longer.
