# Second Age

Further information: Timeline of Arda § Second Age

The Second Age lasted for 3441 years, and ended with the downfall of Sauron,
when he was defeated by the Last Alliance of Elves and Men following the
downfall of [Númenor](). This age was characterized by the rise of Númenor, the
rise of Sauron in Middle-earth (which saw the creation of the Rings of Power
and the Ringwraiths), and the early wars of the Rings between Sauron and the
Elves.

The 3441 years of the Second Age are, for the most part, unchronicled. Besides
the hints about the Second Age found in The Lord of the Rings, several shorter
writings fill in some of the gap between the downfall of Morgoth at the end of
the First Age and the first downfall of Sauron which marked the beginning of
the Third Age.

"The Tale of Years" in Appendix B of The Lord of the Rings outlines the major
events of the Second Age, especially as they relate to the Rings of Power and
the events and characters of The Lord of the Rings. Appendix A of The Lord of
the Rings contains genealogies of the royal house of Númenor. Appendix D of The
Lord of the Rings gives details of the Númenórean calendar, including special
intercalation in the years 1000, 2000 and 3000, and notes on how this system of
intercalation was disrupted by the designation of S.A. 3442 the first year of
the Third Age. In addition, several sections of Unfinished Tales of Númenor and
Middle-earth deal extensively with Númenor and several of its kings. Also, at
the end of The Silmarillion, "Akallabêth", or 'the falling of a star,' recounts
the fall of Númenor and its kings, and also the rise of [Gondor]() and Arnor.

The Men who had remained faithful were given the island of [Númenor](), in the
middle of the [Great Sea](), and there they established a great Kingdom; and
the White Tree of Númenor was planted in the King's city of Armenelos; and it
was said that while that tree stood in the King's courtyard, the reign of
Númenor would yet last. The Elves were granted pardon for the sins of Fëanor,
and were allowed to return home to the [Undying Lands]().

The Númenóreans became great seafarers, and were learned and wise beyond all
other men; and they were granted a lifespan three times that of other mortal
men; and at first, they held to the Ban of the Valar, never sailing into the
Undying Lands. And so they travelled east, and coming to Middle-earth they
helped teach the lesser men valuable skills. After a time, they became jealous
of the Elves for their immortality. Meanwhile, in Middle-earth it became
apparent that Sauron, Morgoth's chief servant, was still active. He worked with
Elven smiths, especially Celebrimbor, the grandson of Fëanor in Eregion on the
craft of rings, and secretly forged the One Ring in the fires of Mount Doom to
dominate them all. But as soon as Sauron put on the One Ring, The Elves were
aware of him and removed theirs. Sauron then made war on the elves, and nearly
destroyed them utterly; but when it seemed defeat was imminent, the
Númenóreans, led by Tar-Minastir, joined the battle and completely crushed the
forces of Sauron, thus saving Gil-galad and the elves of Middle-earth from
obliteration. Sauron never forgot the ruin brought to his armies by the
Númenóreans, and made it his goal to destroy them by whatever means necessary.

Towards the end of the age, the Númenóreans were growing increasingly proud.
Now rather than helping the lesser Men of Middle-earth, they sought to dominate
them and establish kingdoms abroad. Ar-Pharazôn, the last and most powerful of
the Kings of Númenor, humbled even Sauron and brought him to Númenor as a
hostage, although this was Sauron's goal. At this time still beautiful in
appearance, Sauron quickly worked his way into Ar-Pharazôn's court and became
high priest in the cult of Melkor. At this time, the Faithful (who still
worshipped Eru Ilúvatar), were persecuted openly by those called the King's
Men, and were sacrificed in the name of Melkor. Eventually, with the help of
the power of the One Ring, Sauron even convinced Ar-Pharazôn to attempt to
invade Aman, promising that immortality would result.

Amandil, chief of the Faithful, sailed westward to warn the Valar of this. His
son Elendil and grandsons Isildur and Anárion prepared to flee eastwards,
taking with them a seedling of the White Tree of Númenor before Sauron
destroyed it, and the palantíri, gifts of the elves. When the King's men had
landed on Aman, the Valar lay down their guardianship of the world and called
for Ilúvatar to intervene.

The world was changed into a sphere, and the straight road from Middle-earth to
Aman was broken. Númenor was utterly destroyed, as was the fair body of Sauron;
however his spirit drifted back to Mordor, where he again took up the One Ring
and gathered his strength once more. Elendil and his sons were spared, and
together with the remainder of the Faithful, they found safe passage to
Middle-earth, where they founded the realms in exile of Gondor and Arnor.

Sauron arose again and challenged them. The Elves allied with Men to form the
Last Alliance. For seven years, the Alliance laid siege to Barad-dûr, until at
last Sauron himself joined the battle field. And there he slew Elendil, High
King of Gondor and Arnor, as well as Gil-galad, King of the Elves of
Middle-earth. But when it seemed all was lost, Isildur took up the hilt of
Narsil, his father's now shattered sword, and cut the One Ring from Sauron's
hand. And Sauron was defeated, but not utterly destroyed. For Isildur ignored
the counsel of Elrond, and rather than destroy the Ring in the fires of Mount
Doom, he kept it for himself. But the Ring betrayed him, as it slipped from his
finger as he was escaping from an Orc ambush at the Gladden Fields. Isildur was
slain, and the Ring fell into the Anduin River, where it was lost for a time.
