# Timeline of Arda

Tolkien revised his chronology numerous times. The Annals of Valinor were written in the early 1930s. In this early version, a Valian Year corresponds to 10 solar years, and the time from the creation of Arda until the creation of the Moon and Sun is 3,000 Valian Years. In a revision dated c. 1937, the earlier timeline is mostly left intact, with the addition of the explicit statement that "It is said that the Valar came into the world 30,000 Sun-years ere the first rising of the Moon".

The chronology underwent major revisions after the publication of The Lord of the Rings, in about 1958. In this revision, published as the Annals of Aman, Tolkien defined a Valian Year as equal to 9.582 solar years,[2] and the Valian Year of the creation of the Moon and Sun was now given as 5000, so that the time between the creation of Arda and the rising of the Sun and Moon was now the equivalent of 47,910 solar years instead of 30,000.

Late in his life, Tolkien planned to again revise chronology, now assuming one Valian Year as the equivalent of 144 solar years. This is consistent with his earlier decision (published in 1955 in Appendix D of The Lord of the Rings) that the Elves would reckon time in "long-years" or yéni equivalent to 144 solar years (thus equating the yéni and the Valian Year), but Tolkien never finished this final revision.

Elder Days (Valian Years)
Annals of Valinor (1937)
1 V.Y. = 10 solar years	Annals of Aman (1958)
1 V.Y. = 9.582 solar years
Creation of Arda, Years of the Lamps	1	1
Destruction of the Lamps	500	3450
Birth of the Two Trees	1000	3500
Awakening of the Elves	2000	4550
Destruction of the Two Trees	2990	4995
Creation of the Moon and Sun and Awakening of Men	3000	5000
The Ages of the Children of Ilúvatar
First Age	450 Years of the Trees + 590 Years of the Sun
Second Age	3,441 Years of the Sun
Third Age	3,021 Years of the Sun
Fourth Age	of unspecified length, suggested as overlapping with Earth's protohistory

## Valian Years

Before the making of the Sun, dates are given in Valian Years, and not all events can be precisely dated. In such cases events are given in chronological order between known dates. Although all dates prior to the first sunrise have been given in Valian years, these can be converted to Years of the Lamps by subtracting 1900, Years of the Trees by subtracting 3500, or Years of the Trees in the First Age by subtracting 4550.

The conversion between Valian Years and Years of the Sun is not clear, depending on the choice of conversion factors (among many that Tolkien used at different times), the First Age may have lasted anywhere between 4,902 and 65,390 sun years. The greater number is supported by the Appendices to The Lord of the Rings and later writings, the lesser by earlier writings. In Morgoth's Ring, Christopher Tolkien cites a passage stating a Valian Year being "longer than are now nine years under the Sun."[3]

1: After many ages completing labours in the halls of Eä, including Varda's crafting of the stars, the Valar descended into Arda at the time of its origin.
First War: Melkor assaults his brethren and disrupts the ordered symmetry they seek to build within Arda.
1500: Tulkas arrives, the last of the Valar to descend into Arda: Melkor runs from him and hides in the halls of Eä.
The Valar begin their labours anew and order the lands and seas to their liking.
1900: The Two Lamps, Illuin and Ormal, are set upon vast pillars in Middle-earth to provide light for Arda.
Ordering of Arda by the Valar. They form the isle of Almaren to dwell upon, at the centre of Middle-earth.
Spring of Arda: first forests grow, and non-humanoid animals are awakened.
Melkor's spies and secret friends, chief among them a great craftsman of the folk of Aulë, later named Sauron, inform him that the Valar are weary from their labours.
3400: Wedding of Tulkas and Nessa. Melkor returns in secret with followers from Eä and begins building Utumno in the far north of Middle-earth.
Melkor begins to corrupt the lands and living things of Arda, turning them into sickly or monstrous shapes.
The Valar become aware of Melkor's return and begin seeking his stronghold.
3450: Destruction of the Two Lamps and the isle of Almaren by Melkor and his followers; Spring of Arda ends. The Sleep of Yavanna begins in Middle-earth.
Melkor retreats to Utumno while the Valar save what they can from the cataclysm.
The Valar establish a new home in Aman and raise the Pelóri to defend it.
3500: Yavanna makes the Trees of the Valar.

### Years of the Trees

In some cases, after V.Y. 4580, exact chronological order cannot be determined and the placement of undated entries is estimated.

3501: A new tally of years is begun with Year of the Trees 1.
Aulë the Smith makes the Dwarves but is not allowed to awaken them; Yavanna thinks of the Ents in response.
4500: The Valar hold council to discuss the concerns of Oromë and Yavanna regarding Middle-earth and the impending arrival of the Eruhíni, or Children of Ilúvatar.
Varda begins gathering light from the Trees of the Valar for the Great Stars.
Varda sets the Menelmacar and other constellations in the sky.
4550: Varda finishes her work on the Great Stars, setting the Sickle of the Valar in the north as a challenge to Melkor.

### First Age

During the Years of the Trees the First Age of the Children of Ilúvatar begins, at the Awakening of the Elves.

4550: Eru Ilúvatar awakens the Elves in Cuiviénen, in the east of Middle-earth. Melian the Maia departs for Middle-earth.
4580: Melkor discovers and begins capturing Elves in secret. Melkor begins breeding the Orcs from captured Elves, and the Trolls.
4585: Oromë first learns of the Elves.
4586: Oromë returns to Valinor, informs the other Valar of the dangers faced by the Elves, and then returns immediately to Cuiviénen.
4590: The Valar march to war against Melkor on behalf of the Elves: the War of the Powers.
4592: The Valar lay siege to Utumno.
Melian begins dwelling in Nan Elmoth and caring for the living things that have been awakened in Beleriand.
4599: Melkor is captured, and bound in the great chain Angainor; Utumno is destroyed. Sauron escapes capture and remains in Angband, breeding Orcs and Trolls for Melkor.
4600: Melkor is taken to Valinor in chains and sentenced to serve a term in the Halls of Mandos for three ages: the Ages of the Chaining of Melkor.
4601: The Valar decide to summon the Elves to dwell with them in Aman.
4602: Oromë brings three ambassadors of the Elves to Aman: Ingwë of the Vanyar, Finwë of the Noldor, and Elwë of the Teleri.
4604: The three ambassadors return and work to convince the Elves to accept the summons of the Valar. They accumulate many followers.
4605: Great Journey of the Elves: The Elves depart towards Aman. (Not all answer the summons — see Sundering of the Elves.)
4615: The Elves reach the great river which would later be called Anduin. A group of Teleri under Lenwë (or Dan), wary of crossing the Misty Mountains, abandon the March near the Anduin and become the Nandor.
Fathers of the Dwarves and first Ents awakened by Eru Ilúvatar; Elves discover the Ents and begin teaching them language.
4625: The Vanyar and Noldor arrive in Beleriand, in the north-west of Middle-earth.
4628: The Teleri arrive in Beleriand after tarrying in the great forests of Eriador.
4630: Elwë meets Melian and is entranced.
4632: Ulmo is unwilling to wait until Elwë is found, and the Vanyar and Noldor are ferried across the ocean on the island of Tol Eressëa, while the Teleri stay behind in Beleriand, looking for their lord.
4633: The Vanyar and Noldor settle in Eldamar and begin building Tirion.
4640: Tirion is finished, Mindon Eldaliéva is built. Ingwë and many of the Vanyar leave Tirion to dwell with Manwë in Valimar.
4642: Yavanna gives the White Tree, Galathilion, to the Noldor.
4649: Ulmo finally returns for the Teleri, but many stay behind because Elwë is not yet found, and become the Sindar. Another group remains behind at the request of Ossë, and together with those who came too late they become the Elves of the Falas under Círdan.
4651: The majority of the Teleri are ferried across on Tol Eressëa, which is anchored in the Bay of Eldamar. They take Elwë's brother, Olwë, as lord.
4652: Elwë awakes from slumber and reunites with the Sindar. He becomes known as Thingol, settling in Doriath.
4661: The Teleri of Tol Eressëa learn the art of shipbuilding, and ferry across the bay of Eldamar to Aman, where they found the city of Alqualondë.
4665: The last Vanyar abandon Tirion and settle in Valimar proper. The Noldor remain in Tirion under their lord, Finwë.
4669: Fëanor is born. Rúmil invents writing. Nogrod and Belegost founded by Dwarves; Khazad-dûm founded by Durin the Deathless.
4670: Míriel dies.
4672: The Valar issue the Statute of Finwë and Míriel
4685: Finwë and Indis are married.
4690: Fingolfin is born.
4700: Lúthien is born.
4730: Finarfin is born.
4750: Dwarves of Nogrod and Belegost are met by the Sindar, establishing trade. Fëanor develops the Tengwar.
4780: Finarfin and Eärwen are married.
4800: Turgon and Finrod Felagund are born. Menegroth is built by the Dwarves of Belegost and the Sindar. Daeron devises the Cirth.
4830: Orcs begin to appear in Beleriand. The Dwarves of Belegost make weapons for the Sindar.
4850: The Nandor, under Denethor, arrive in Beleriand, becoming known as the Green Elves of Ossiriand. The Halls of Menegroth are finished.
4862: Aredhel and Galadriel are born.
4900: Melkor is freed from his sentence.
4910: Melkor begins corrupting some of the Noldor.
4949: Fëanor begins to make the Silmarils.
4950: Fëanor completes the forging of the Silmarils, capturing some of the light of the Two Trees.
4950–70: Melkor spreads lies among the Noldor and talks of weapons.
4990: Fëanor, deceived by Melkor, draws arms against his brother and is banished from Tirion: his father, Finwë, and many of the Noldor follow him in exile to Formenos.
4992: Fëanor argues with Melkor at Formenos. Melkor hides from capture by the Valar and joins forces with Ungoliant.
4995: The Darkening of Valinor. Manwë tries to heal the feud of the Noldor, and summons Fëanor to a festival in Valimar. Melkor and Ungoliant destroy the Two Trees, kill Finwë, steal the Silmarils, and flee to Middle-earth. Fëanor becomes High King of the Noldor, renaming Melkor as Morgoth. Fëanor and his sons swear an oath to regain the Silmarils and the majority of the Noldor depart from Valinor; Noldor kill many Teleri and seize their ships in the First Kinslaying.
4996: Doom of Mandos: the Noldor are banished from Valinor and face great doom. Finarfin turns back and returns to Valinor.
4997: Morgoth returns to Angband, and tries to take Beleriand: First Battle of Beleriand is fought; Denethor of the Green-elves slain and the Havens of the Falas are besieged. The Noldor arrive at Helcaraxë; Fëanor and his host betray the sons of Indis and sail across, then burn the ships at Losgar. Death of Amrod at Losgar. Return of the Noldor to Middle-earth. Morgoth's army attacks Fëanor. Dagor-nuin-Giliath ("the Battle under Stars") is fought. Fëanor is slain by Balrogs in sight of Angband. Maedhros becomes High King of the Noldor; he feigns to treat with Morgoth, but is ambushed and taken captive. The Hiding of Valinor: the Valar conceal Valinor behind the Shadowy Seas and raise the Pelóri mountains to greater heights. They begin devising the Moon and Sun.
4998: Maedhros is hung upon Thangorodrim. The Noldor camp around Mithrim, refusing to depart as Morgoth demanded
5000: The host of Fingolfin arrives in Middle-earth; the Moon arises. Battle of the Lammoth and death of Argon.

## Years of the Sun

### Years of the Sun in the First Age

From this time on years are of normal length. Events from Valinor during the Years of the Sun cannot be accurately dated. All entries are derived from The Grey Annals (see references) unless otherwise noted. The dating begins anew at 1, although these years are still held to be part of the First Age.

1: The Sun first sets sail, start of reckoning by 'Years of the Sun', Awakening of Men in Hildórien.
2: Fingolfin camps at Lake Mithrim
5: Fingon rescues Maedhros. Fingolfin becomes High King of the Noldor: the feud among the Noldor is healed.
6: Angrod meets Thingol in Doriath. Thingol permits the Noldor to occupy Hithlum, Dorthonion, and East Beleriand.
7: Sons of Fëanor depart to Eastern Beleriand.
20: The Mereth Aderthad (Feast of Reuniting) is held at Eithel Ivrin.
50: Turgon and Finrod are told by Ulmo to establish a refuge.
52: Finrod begins building Nargothrond.
53: Turgon discovers the hidden valley of Tumladen.
60: Dagor Aglareb: the Noldor defeat Morgoth's forces and start the Siege of Angband.
60–c. 200: Morgoth is absent from Angband, after discovering Men. Persuaded by Morgoth, Men stop worshipping Eru Ilúvatar and turn to evil, but some revolt: the Atanatári. These travel to the West in search for the Valar, aided by Avari Elves and Dwarves. According to legend, Men now lose the gift to die at will as the result of divine punishment, and are doomed to lead short life-spans at the end of which death takes them by force.[4]
64: Turgon begins building Gondolin.
65: The havens of Brithombar and Eglarest are fortified; the Tower of Barad Nimras is built.
66: Galadriel tells Melian of the Silmarils.
67: Thingol learns of the Kinslaying at Alqualondë. Quenya is prohibited by Thingol.
102: Nargothrond is completed: Finrod's folk depart from Hithlum.
116: Gondolin is completed. Turgon's people begin the migration from Nevrast in secret.
150: The Dwarves renew their trade in Beleriand. Caranthir meets them.
155: An assault upon Hithlum from the Firth of Drengist is defeated by Fingolfin's forces.
260: Glaurung ravages Ard-galen, but is driven back to Angband. The Long Peace begins.
262: Bëor is born.
282: Marach is born.
289: Baran is born.
292: Belen is born.
307: Malach is born.
310: Bëor leads the First House of the Edain into Beleriand: they are discovered by Finrod. They move to Estolad, and after a few years the Second House enters Thargelion and the Third settles in Estolad.[5][6] Imlach born.
311: Finrod and Bëor leave Estolad together. Baran becomes lord of the House of Bëor.
316: Aredhel departs from Gondolin and comes to Eöl.
320: The Edain begin migrating from Estolad to Dorthonion, Hithlum and Talath Dirnen.[5]
369: Many of the Edain, led by Bereg, leave to Eriador.[5]
375: Orcs attack Thargelion; many of the Second House of the Edain perish, but next year Haleth leads the remnants to Estolad.[5]
390: Haleth lead her people from Eriador and in 391 they come to the lands south of Taeglin. The majority later enter the forest of Brethil.[5][7]
400: Aredhel and Maeglin return to Gondolin; later, Eöl and Aredhel die.
410: The province of Ladros is officially granted to Boromir of the House of Bëor.[5]
416: Dor-lómin is granted to the House of Marach.[5]
432: Beren Erchamion is born.[8]
455: Morgoth breaks the Siege of Angband in Dagor Bragollach ("Battle of Sudden Flame"); Dorthonion is laid waste, Angrod and Aegnor die, people of Barahir become outlaws. Finrod's fortress of Minas Tirith is captured by the forces of Sauron; Tol Sirion is renamed Tol-in-Gaurhoth, "Isle of Werewolves".[9]
456: Fingolfin challenges Morgoth to single combat and is slain. Fingon becomes the High King of the Noldor.
458: Húrin and Huor are separated from the Folk of Brethil during a battle and are brought to Gondolin by Thorondor.
459: Húrin and Huor return out of Gondolin to Dor-lómin.
460: Barahir and companions are betrayed by Gorlim and killed, but Beren survives.
462: Morgoth tries to assault Hithlum but is withstood by Fingon and Círdan.
463: The first hosts of Easterlings appear in Beleriand.
464: Túrin Turambar is born in Gwaeron (March).[10] Beren departs for Doriath and is enchanted by Lúthien.
465: Beren sets on a Quest of the Silmaril, comes to Nargothrond and receives help of Finrod Felagund. They are imprisoned in Tol-in-Gaurhoth. Finrod is slain by a werewolf, but Beren is rescued by Lúthien. Celegorm and Curufin are exiled from Nargothrond and attempt to attack Beren and Lúthien, but fail. Celebrimbor the son of Curufin rejects the deeds of his father and stays in Nargothrond.
466: Lalaith is born in the beginning of spring.[10] Beren and Lúthien come to Angband and achieve the Quest of the Silmaril. They return to Doriath, but Carcharoth ravages the land. Beren dies, and Lúthien abandons life. She pleads with Mandos and Beren and Lúthien are restored to life as mortals; they take up bodies again in Ossiriand.
468: The Union of Maedhros is begun.
469: Lalaith dies in autumn.[10]
470: Dior Eluchíl is born.
472: Nírnaeth Arnoediad, "The Battle of Unnumbered Tears", is fought at midsummer. Morgoth utterly defeats the Elves and Edain. Fingon and Huor are slain, but Gwindor and Húrin are captured. Turgon becomes High King of the Noldor. Easterlings invade Hithlum, in autumn Morwen sends Túrin to Doriath. Tuor, son of Huor, is born.
473: Nienor is born in the beginning of year; Túrin reaches Doriath. Havens of the Falas are besieged and captured.
481: Dor-lómin is cut off; Túrin goes to the marches of Dimbar.[11]
484: In summer Túrin slays Saeros, flees from Doriath and joins the outlaws.
485: In spring Túrin becomes the outlaws' leader, meets Beleg in summer.[10] In summer Mîm leads the outlaws to Amon Rûdh.[10]
486: In the beginning of year Beleg joins Túrin; by autumn Dor-Cúarthol prospers.[10]
489: In autumn Amon Rûdh is taken; Túrin captured, but is rescued by Gwindor and Beleg, and slays the latter.
490: In the beginning of year Túrin is healed at Eithel Ivrin, comes to Nargothrond. Gurthang is reforged, Túrin becomes known as the Blacksword.
494: In autumn Morwen and Nienor flee to Doriath.
495: Fall of Nargothrond in autumn; Gwindor, Orodreth and his daughter Finduilas perish, but his son Gil-galad escapes with Celebrimbor. In the beginning of winter Túrin passes Ivrin; Tuor comes to Nevrast.
496: Túrin rises a revolt in Dor-lómin;[12] in the beginning of spring he comes to Brethil, Morwen with Nienor journey to Nargothrond; Níniel comes to Brethil. Tuor arrives at Gondolin.
497: Turambar asks Níniel in marriage, but she delays.[10] Dior marries Nimloth.
498: Turambar marries Níniel in autumn;[12] before the end of the year he returns to warfare.
499: In spring Níniel conceives; in the beginning of summer Glaurung is slain; both Túrin Turambar and Nienor Níniel die.[10]
500: Húrin released from captivity.[12] Birth of Eluréd and Elurín.
501: Morwen dies. The Kin-strife in Brethil is brought about by Húrin.[12]
502: Húrin brings the Nauglamír from Nargothrond to Thingol.[12]
From this point the entries are derived from The Tale of Years of the First Age (see references) unless otherwise noted.

502: Reforging of the Nauglamír and quarrel of Thingol (king of Doriath) and the Dwarves. Thingol is slain.[13] Melian returns to Valinor in grief.
503: Doriath is sacked by Dwarves of Nogrod. Beren and the Laiquendi destroy the Dwarves, with the help of the Ents who prevent the Dwarves' escape; Lúthien receives and wears the Silmaril, Dior Eluchíl (the heir of Thingol) travels to Doriath and tries to restore it. Eärendil and Elwing are born. Final deaths of Beren and Lúthien; Dior receives the Silmaril in autumn.
505: Sons of Fëanor demand the Silmaril from Dior.
506–7: Sons of Fëanor attack Doriath at Yule. Doriath is destroyed in the Second Kinslaying; Dior, Nimloth, Celegorm, Curufin, and Caranthir are all slain, and Eluréd and Elurín are abandoned to die by the cruel servants of Celegorm. Maedhros searches for them, but does not find them. Elwing escapes for the Mouths of Sirion with the Silmaril.
509: Maeglin captured by Morgoth's spies.
510: Gondolin is betrayed by Maeglin and sacked; Glorfindel slays a Balrog in the Echoriath, and Ecthelion and Gothmog slay each other. Turgon is killed; Tuor and Idril escape. Gil-galad son of Orodreth becomes High King of the Noldor.
511: Tuor and Idril bring Eärendil and the refugees of Gondolin to the Mouths of Sirion which prosper as 'New Havens'.
512: Maedhros learns that a Silmaril is at the Havens of Sirion, but forswears his Oath.
525: Eärendil marries Elwing. Tuor feels 'Unquiet of Ulmo' and sails into the West in the ship Eärrámë with Idril.
527: Maedhros, Maglor, and Amras are tormented by their unfulfilled Oath.
532: Elrond and Elros are born to Eärendil and Elwing.[14]
534: Eärendil begins his great voyages.
538: Third Kinslaying: while Eärendil is away the remaining Sons of Fëanor attack the people of the Mouths of Sirion trying to claim the Silmaril. Elwing casts herself with the Jewel in the sea but is brought to Eärendil upon Vingilótë by Ulmo. Amras dies. Of the Sons of Fëanor only Maedhros and Maglor now remain. Maglor takes Elrond and Elros captive and raises them.
540: Morgoth destroys the dwellings of Fëanorians upon Amon Ereb. The last inhabitants of Beleriand flee to the south or to the Isle of Balar. Morgoth's triumph is complete.
542: Eärendil arrives in Valinor and delivers the errand of the Two Kindreds. Aided by the Valar he then sails into the sky with his Silmaril to become a bright new "star" (Venus).
545: The Host of the Valar arrives in Beleriand.
545–587: The War of Wrath.
587: Ancalagon killed by Eärendil. Morgoth is defeated; the remaining two Silmarils are stolen by Maedhros and Maglor, but are lost in the earth and in the sea; suicide of Maedhros;[15] most of Beleriand and the lands to the north are sunk.
590: Morgoth is cast into the Void; the Elves are summoned to Valinor and settle in Tol Eressëa; a small part of the Noldor and Sindar remain in Lindon (previously part of Ossiriand) or depart east and establish realms.

### Second Age

The Second Age was 3441 years long. Most dates relating to Númenor derive from part 2 of Unfinished Tales; all other entries are derived from Appendix B of The Lord of the Rings unless otherwise noted.

1: Foundation of Mithlond the Grey Havens under Círdan, and Lindon as the Noldorin Kingdom under Gil-galad
32: Edain reach Númenor from Middle-earth, Elros becomes first King of Númenor
c. 40: Many Dwarves abandon the ruined cities of Belegost and Nogrod in the Ered Luin and join Durin's folk in Moria
61: Birth of Vardamir Nólimon, eldest child of Elros. Subsequently, three more children are born.
192: Birth of Tar-Amandil
222: Birth of Nolondil
350: Birth of Tar-Elendil
361: Birth of Eärendur son of Tar-Amandil
442: Elros, also known as Tar-Minyatur, dies. Vardamir Nólimon succeeds the throne but abdicates immediately. Tar-Amandil becomes third king of Númenor.
c. 500: Sauron arises again in Middle-earth
521: Silmariën is born in Númenor,[16] line of lords of Andúnië splits off the line of Kings
532: Isilmë, sister of Silmariën, born
543: Meneldur, brother of Silmariën, born
590: Tar-Elendil becomes fourth king of Númenor.
600: First Númenórean ship sails to Middle-earth.
700: Anardil (better known as Aldarion) born
740: Tar-Meneldur becomes fifth king of Númenor.
750: the Noldor found the realm of Eregion near Khazad-dûm (later known as Moria); Aldarion founds the Guild of Venturers in Númenor
800: Aldarion formally proclaimed as King's Heir. Around this time he founds Vinyalondë on the Enedwaith coast of Middle-earth for lumbering and ship repair.
853: Betrothal of Aldarion and Erendis
870: Aldarion and Erendis wed
873: Ancalimë born
882: Aldarion and Erendis separate
883: Tar-Aldarion becomes sixth king of Númenor.
985: Death of Erendis, apparently by drowning.
892: Ancalimë officially proclaimed as King's Heir.
c. 1000: Sauron begins building Barad-dûr
1075: Tar-Ancalimë becomes the first ruling Queen and seventh monarch of Númenor.
c. 1200: Sauron seduces and deceives the Noldor in Eregion, but Gil-galad mistrusts him and refuses to work with him; the Númenóreans begin building permanent havens in Middle-earth at Lond Daer, Umbar, and other places
1280: Tar-Anárion becomes eighth monarch of Númenor.
c. 1350: Celeborn and Galadriel together with their daughter Celebrían emigrate from Eregion to Lórien; Celebrimbor becomes lord of Eregion
1394: Tar-Súrion becomes ninth monarch king of Númenor.
c. 1500: the Noldor under Celebrimbor are instructed by Sauron, beginning of the forging of the Rings of Power
1566: Tar-Telperiën becomes the second ruling Queen and tenth monarch of Númenor.
c. 1590: The Three Rings are completed in Eregion.
c. 1600: Forging of the One Ring; Barad-dûr completed; Celebrimbor begins fighting Sauron; Glorfindel is sent back to Middle-earth by the Valar
1693: War of the Elves and Sauron begins, the Three Rings are hidden
1695: Elrond sent to Eregion as lieutenant of Gil-galad
1697: Eregion destroyed, Celebrimbor is killed, Elrond establishes the refuge of Rivendell, the gates of Khazad-dûm (Moria) are shut.
1699: Rivendell and Lindon besieged, Sauron overruns most of Eriador.
1700: Minastir sends a great navy to Lindon; Sauron defeated; Sauron's forces retreat from Eriador and the coasts
1731: Tar-Minastir becomes eleventh monarch of Númenor.
c. 1800: Númenor begins establishing permanent settlements in Middle-earth, Sauron extends his power eastwards.
1869: Tar-Ciryatan becomes twelfth monarch of Númenor.
2029: Tar-Atanamir the Great becomes thirteenth monarch of Númenor but is hostile to the Valar. The Elendili or "Faithful" still receive the Elves in secret.
2221: Tar-Ancalimon becomes fourteenth monarch of Númenor.[17]
2251: The Ringwraiths first appear.
2280: Umbar is fortified by the Númenóreans
2350: Pelargir is built by the Elendili
2386: Tar-Telemmaitë becomes fifteenth monarch of Númenor.
2526: Tar-Vanimeldë becomes third (and last) ruling Queen and sixteenth monarch of Númenor.
2637: Herucalmo seizes the throne and rule as Tar-Anducal, but he is not counted in the list of kings.
2657: Tar-Alcarin becomes seventeenth monarch of Númenor.
2737: Tar-Calmacil becomes eighteenth monarch of Númenor.
2825: Tar-Ardamin becomes nineteenth monarch of Númenor.
2899: Ar-Adûnakhôr becomes twentieth monarch of Númenor and the first to take his royal name in Adûnaic, a language of Men, instead of Quenya, the high language of the Elves
c. 2900: Teaching of Elvish languages prohibited in Númenor.
2962: Ar-Zimrathôn becomes twenty-first monarch of Númenor.
3033: Ar-Sakalthôr becomes twenty-second monarch of Númenor.
3102: Ar-Gimilzôr becomes twenty-third monarch of Númenor.
c. 3110: Usage of Elvish languages and visit of the Elves prohibited in Númenor.
3119: Birth of Elendil
3177: Tar-Palantir becomes twenty-fourth monarch of Númenor and repents the policies of his recent predecessors, resulting in a civil war
3209: Birth of Isildur
3219: Birth of Anárion
3243: Death of Gimilkhâd, at the age of 198 years.
3255: Tar-Palantir dies. His heir is his daughter Míriel, but her first cousin Ar-Pharazôn the Golden forces her to marry him, and seizes the throne of Númenor, becoming its twenty-fifth (and last) monarch
3261: Ar-Pharazôn sails to Middle-earth landing at Umbar, and takes Sauron captive
3262: Sauron is taken as prisoner to Númenor, but begins corrupting the Númenóreans
c. 3265: Sauron becomes Ar-Pharazôn's court advisor.
c. 3280: Isildur steals a fruit from Nimloth. The White Tree is felled and burnt in Sauron's Temple thereafter.
c. 3300: Sauron establishes himself as High Priest of Melkor, "Lord of the Dark"; Elendili are openly persecuted and sacrificed to Morgoth
3310: At Sauron's instigation, Ar-Pharazôn begins building the Great Armament.
3318: Birth of Meneldil, fourth child of Anárion and last man born in Númenor
3319: Ar-Pharazôn sets foot in Aman, resulting in the Change of the World: Aman and Tol Eressëa are removed from Arda, Númenor is drowned, and the world is made round. Elendil and his sons arrive on the shores of Middle-earth in nine ships.
3320: Founding of Arnor and Gondor by Elendil and his sons, Isildur and Anárion; Umbar as realm in exile founded by Black Númenóreans. Sauron returns to Mordor.
3429: Sauron attacks Gondor, conquers Minas Ithil and burns the White Tree; Isildur flees to Arnor while Anárion defends Osgiliath and Minas Anor
3430: The Last Alliance of Elves and Men is formed
3434: The Last Alliance crosses the Misty Mountains; Sauron's forces are defeated in the Battle of Dagorlad; Siege of Barad-dûr begins
3440: Anárion is slain
3441: Elendil and Gil-galad face Sauron in hand-to-hand combat, but they themselves perish; Isildur takes the shards of his father's sword Narsil and cuts the One Ring from Sauron's finger. Sauron's physical form is destroyed and the Barad-dûr is razed to the ground. In the aftermath of the War, many Elves of Gil-galad's following depart to Valinor: end of the Noldorin realms in Middle-earth.

### Third Age

The Third Age was 3,021 years long; virtually all its recorded events take place in Middle-earth. All entries are derived from Appendix B of The Lord of the Rings, except for the following or otherwise noted:

birthdates of Dwarves (derived from Appendix A part III)
dates of the Kings of Rohan (derived from Appendix A part II)
Note on Shire Reckoning: Year 1601 of the Third Age, in which the Shire was founded, is year 1 of the Shire Reckoning. Thus, Third Age years can be converted into their Shire equivalents by deducting 1600.

1: Isildur is crowned High King of Gondor and Arnor
2: Isildur plants Second White Tree in Minas Tirith and appoints his nephew Meneldil as king of Gondor. Disaster of the Gladden Fields (5th 'October'): death of Isildur by Orcs, losing the One Ring in the Anduin river; he is succeeded as king of Arnor by his son Valandil.
109: Elrond weds Celebrían, daughter of Galadriel and Celeborn
130: Elladan and Elrohir are born to Elrond and Celebrían
241: Arwen Undómiel is born to Elrond and Celebrían
490: Easterlings invade Gondor
541: Easterlings invade Gondor once more, slaying Rómendacil I, its 8th king
c. 550: Turambar, 9th king of Gondor, defeats the Easterlings of Rhûn; the Northmen of Rhovanion becomes allies of Gondor
830: Tarannon Falastur succeeds as 12th king of Gondor and first of the Ship-kings
861: Following Eärendur's death, the kingdom of Arnor breaks up into Arthedain, Cardolan and Rhudaur. The Court and the palantír of Annúminas are moved to Fornost.
933: Eärnil I, 13th king of Gondor, takes Umbar in a surprise attack. A monument to commemorate Sauron´s defeat is built in Umbar.
936: Eärnil I lost at sea
c. 1000: The Wizards come to Middle-earth
1015: Hyarmendacil I ascends to the throne of Gondor as 15th king
1015: Black Númenóreans of Umbar besiege their old city
1050: Hyarmendacil I conquers Umbar, finishing the siege of Umbar. Hobbits migrate to Eriador. The shadow of Sauron falls upon Greenwood the Great, which is renamed Mirkwood.
1149: Death of Hyarmendacil I, Atanatar II succeeds to the crown of Gondor as 16th king
c. 1200: Rulers of Rhovanion assume the title "King of Rhovanion"
1240: Minalcar becomes Regent of Gondor
1248: Minalcar of Gondor strikes decisive blow to the Easterlings; forms a strong alliance with Rhovanion, to which he cedes all the lands east of the Anduin
1255: Eldacar of Gondor born as Vinitharya in Rhovanion
c. 1259: Castamir born[18]
1300: Nazgûl reappear in Middle-earth, the kingdom of Angmar first appears at Arthedain's north-eastern border, built by the Witch-king, later revealed as Lord of the Nazgûl.
1304: Minalcar succeeds as 19th king of Gondor, taking the name Rómendacil II
1344: Death of Vidumavi
1356: King Argeleb I of Arthedain is killed during an invasion by Rhudaur, now controlled by Angmar; his son, Arveleg I, ascends the throne
1366: Valacar ascends the throne of Gondor as 20th king
1409: Cardolan is conquered by the kingdom of Angmar, and Rhudaur disappears; Weathertop watchtower and fortifications are burned and destroyed. Annúminas is attacked, sacked and abandoned in ruins until the Fourth Age.
1432: Eldacar succeeds his father, Valacar, becoming 21st king of Gondor
1437: Castamir the Usurper, Lord of Ships, usurps throne of Gondor (see Kin-strife); Osgiliath's palantír is lost in the river
1447: Eldacar reclaims Gondor with a Rhovanion army and kills Castamir
1448: Sons of Castamir the Usurper and most of the fleet of Gondor flee south to Umbar; become known as the Corsairs of Umbar
1540: Aldamir, 23rd king of Gondor, is slain by Haradrim
1600: Two Fallohide brothers decided to cross the River Baranduin and settle on the other side, and are followed by large numbers of Hobbits
1601: The Shire is first settled by Hobbits, led by the brothers Marcho and Blanco: the Year 1 in Shire Reckoning
1634: Corsairs of Umbar attack Gondor, slaying king Minardil at Pelargir, and raiding the city
1635: The Great Plague spreads from Rhûn to Wilderland in the winter at the end of the year.
1636: The Great Plague decimates Gondor and Rhovanion; King Telemnar and his children die, as does the White Tree. Cirith Ungol is abandoned.
1640: Tarondor, 27th king of Gondor, transfers his capital from Osgiliath to Minas Anor (later named Minas Tirith), planting a new White Tree.
1810: Telumehtar, 28th king of Gondor, reconquers Umbar; renames himself Umbardacil
1846: Haradrim, Wainriders and the Variags of Khand take Umbar; new Corsairs of Umbar emerge, officially ally themselves with Mordor and destroy the great monument commemorating Ar-Pharazôn's victory over Sauron
1851: The Wainriders first attack Gondor
1856: The Wainriders overrun eastern territories of Gondor; death of Narmacil II (29th king) in battle.
1899: Gondor attacks Wainriders from the east; the Kingdom of Rhovanion, occupied by Wainriders, rebels and is freed
1900: The White Tower is built in Minas Anor by Calimehtar, 30th king of Gondor
1936: Ondoher succeeds Calimehtar, becoming 31st king of Gondor
1944: During an invasion by the Wainriders and the Haradrim, King Ondoher of Gondor and his sons are killed in battle.
1945: Eärnil II is awarded the crown of Gondor as its 32nd king
1964: Arvedui, son of King Araphant of Arthedain, ascends the throne
1974: The kingdom of Arthedain is conquered by Angmar. Fornost is attacked and left abandoned until the Fourth Age.
1975: Death of Arvedui and loss of the two palantíri of Amon Sûl (Weathertop) and Annúminas. Gondor destroys Angmar in the Battle of Fornost.
1980: The Moria Dwarves awaken Durin's Bane, a Balrog, which kills Durin VI, King of Khazad-dûm; the Nazgûl return to Mordor and lay siege to Minas Ithil.
1981: Durin VI's son, Náin I, is also killed, and the Dwarves flee Moria; deaths of Amroth and Nimrodel
1999: Thráin I founds realm of Erebor, discovers Arkenstone
2002: Minas Ithil falls to the Nazgûl, is renamed Minas Morgul
2043: King Eärnil II of Gondor dies and his son, the Witch-king's old enemy Eärnur, inherits the throne as the 33rd (and last) king. Upon his coronation, the Witch-king challenges him to combat, but King Eärnur refuses.
2050: The Witch-king again challenges King Eärnur, this time he accepts. Eärnur rides out of Minas Tirith to meet the Witch-king in Minas Morgul. He enters the city's gates and is never seen again, thus ending the reign of the Gondorian Kings and causing the beginning of the Ruling Stewards of Gondor, until the time of King Elessar.
2063: Gandalf drives Sauron from Dol Guldur. The Watchful Peace begins.
2210: Thorin I, son of Thráin I, leaves Erebor with most of his people, settles in the Grey Mountains
2430: Approximate birth year of Sméagol
2460: Sauron returns to western Middle-earth; establishes himself in Dol Guldur in southern Mirkwood. The Watchful Peace ends.
2463: Sméagol (later known as Gollum) becomes the fourth bearer of the One Ring, after killing his cousin Déagol, who had found the Ring in the Anduin.
2475: First Uruks appear out of Mordor in attacks on Gondor.
2501: Eorl the Young, succeeds his father as lord of the Éothéod; he proceeds to tame Felaróf, the forefather of the Mearas.
2509: Cirion, Steward of Gondor, sends summons to the Éothéod for military aid; Celebrían is waylaid by Orcs, receives a poisoned wound, and consequentially departs Middle-earth
2510: The Easterlings launch a massive invasion of Gondor. The Balchoth invade Rhovanion (which disappears as an independent realm) and Gondor, conquering much of Calenardhon, but are driven back by the people of Éothéod in the Battle of the Field of Celebrant (15th 'April'). Gondor cedes the now-uninhabited province of Calenardhon to the people of Éothéod, where they found their independent kingdom Rohan. The alliance between and Gondor and Rohan comes into existence.
2545: Eorl the Young, king of Rohan, dies in the battle in the Wold against the Easterlings. Brego succeeds him as the second king of Rohan
2570: Aldor, aged only 26, becomes third king of Rohan on the death of his father Brego; Dragons attack the Dwarf settlements in the Grey Mountains
2589: King Dáin I and his son Frór are killed by a cold-drake. Dáin is succeeded by his eldest son, Thrór.
2590: Thrór leaves the Grey Mountains and resettles the Lonely Mountain; his brother, Grór, settles in the Iron Hills
2645: Fréa becomes fourth king of Rohan after the death of his father Aldor ('the Old')
2659: Fréawine, fifth King of Rohan
2680: Goldwine, sixth King of Rohan
2698: Ecthelion I, 17th Steward of Gondor, rebuilds the White Tower in Minas Tirith in the last year of his rule
2699: Déor, seventh king of Rohan
2718: Gram, eighth king of Rohan
2741: Helm Hammerhand ninth king of Rohan ascends the throne as last king of the first line
2746: Amrothos, fifteenth Prince of Dol Amroth, falls while defending Dor-en-Ernil against the Corsairs of Umbar. Birth of Thorin Oakenshield.
2747: Bandobras "Bullroarer" Took leads a force of hobbits and defeats invading Orcs of the Misty Mountains in the Northfarthing at the Battle of Greenfields
2758: Dunlendings, under Wulf, invade Rohan, supported by the Corsairs of Umbar
The Long Winter of 2758–2759: The Dunlendings lay siege to the Hornburg
2759: Helm Hammerhand, king of Rohan, freezes to death outside the fortress of Helm's Deep, where he and his loyal subjects have taken refuge from the Dunlendings. He is succeeded by his nephew Fréaláf Hildeson; Saruman settles in Isengard
2760: Birth of Dís, daughter of Thráin II, and the only female Dwarf whose name is recorded.
2763: Birth of Balin
2770: Smaug lays waste to the town of Dale and captures Erebor with all of its treasure; Girion is killed. The surviving Dwarves there are driven into exile.
2772: Birth of Dwalin
2783: Birth of Glóin
2789: Thrór prepares to hand over his heirlooms to his son Thráin II: a map, a key, and the last of the Seven Rings.
2790: Thrór enters Moria and is killed by Orc chieftain Azog, starting the War of the Dwarves and Orcs
2798: Fréaláf Hildeson, tenth king of Rohan, dies. He is followed by his son Brytta Léofa
2799: The Battle of Azanulbizar, the culmination of the War of the Dwarves and Orcs, is fought outside Moria's East Gate, in which the Dwarves defeat the Orcs of Moria, including slaying their chieftain Azog, but lack the strength to retake Moria. Interment of the Burned Dwarves.
2802: Thráin II settles in the Blue Mountains
2842: Brytta Léofa, eleventh king of Rohan, dies. Succeeded by his son Walda.
2845: Thráin II is captured by forces of Sauron and imprisoned in Dol Guldur after having wandered for four years trying to reclaim the lost treasure at Erebor and the last of the Dwarves' Rings of Power is taken from him
2850: Gandalf enters Dol Guldur and confirms that the evil thereby found is indeed Sauron returned; Thráin II, broken, raving, and dying, gives Gandalf his map and key to be passed on to his son, Thorin Oakenshield
2851: Walda, twelfth king of Rohan, is killed by an orc, his son Folca succeeds him
2852: Belecthor II, the 21st Steward of Gondor, dies, as does the White Tree.
2859: Birth of Fíli
2864: Birth of Kíli. Folca, thirteenth king of Rohan, is killed by the Boar of Everholt. He is succeeded by his son Folcwine
2879: Birth of Gimli
2885: Harondor is once again claimed by the Haradrim, supported by the Corsairs of Umbar. Fastred and Folcred, the twin sons of king Folcwine, were killed during the Battle of Crossings of Poros
'September' 22, 2890: Bilbo Baggins is born in the Shire.
2903: Folcwine, fourteenth king of Rohan, dies and is succeeded by his youngest son Fengel
2907: Birth of Gilraen
The Fell Winter of 2911–2912: wolves invade the Shire. Tharbad is ruined in the following floods.
2929: Arathorn II marries Gilraen
2930: Arathorn II becomes the Chieftain of the Dúnedain. Denethor II is born in Minas Tirith.
2931: Birth of Aragorn on 'March' 1, son of Arathorn II and Gilraen
2933: Arathorn II is killed while hunting Orcs
'March' 15, 2941: Thorin Oakenshield meets with Gandalf the Grey at the Prancing Pony in Bree, the Quest of Erebor begins
'April' 2941: The story of The Hobbit begins: Gandalf, Thorin and his Dwarves arrive at Bag End, the smial of Bilbo Baggins, the titular character.
'July' 2941: Bilbo Baggins obtains the One Ring; the White Council drives Sauron out of Dol Guldur.
'October' 2941: Esgaroth is attacked by the dragon Smaug, who is consequentially killed by Bard the Bowman.
'November' 2941: Thorin Oakenshield, Fíli, and Kíli killed in the Battle of Five Armies along with Bolg son of Azog; Dáin II Ironfoot becomes King of the Lonely Mountain; town of Dale re-established by Bard.
'June' 22, 2942: Bilbo Baggins returns to Bag End.
2944: Bard becomes first king of Dale.
2948: Birth of Théoden.
2949: Conclusion of The Hobbit: Gandalf and Balin visit Bilbo in Bag End.
2951: Sauron reveals himself in Mordor, and starts raising Barad-dûr anew. Estel, later known as Aragorn, comes of age and is told about his heritage.
2953: Last meeting of the White Council. Fengel, fifteenth king of Rohan, dies; his son Thengel returns to Rohan to succeed him. Turgon, the Steward of Gondor also dies; his son Ecthelion II succeeds, and Ecthelion's son Denethor II inherits the Horn of Gondor.
2956: Aragorn first meets Gandalf the Grey
2957–2980: Aragorn as Thorongil serves in the armies of King Thengel of Rohan, and Steward Ecthelion II of Gondor
'September' 22, 2968: Frodo Baggins is born
2976: Marriage of Denethor II and Finduilas of Dol Amroth
2978: Birth of Boromir, elder son of Denethor and Finduilas
2980: Arwen pledges her hand in marriage to Aragorn; Frodo Baggins loses both of his parents in a boating accident; Aragorn, in the service of the Steward of Gondor Ecthelion II leads a taskforce south and kills the Captain of the Haven, ruler of Umbar; Samwise Gamgee born;[19] Théoden, son of Thengel, becomes seventeenth king of Rohan after the death of his father.
2982: Birth of Meriadoc Brandybuck (Merry)
2983: Birth of Faramir, younger son of Denethor and Finduilas
2984: Denethor II succeeds his father, becoming the 26th Steward of Gondor; Boromir inherits the Horn of Gondor.
2989: Frodo Baggins comes under the guardianship of Bilbo Baggins; Dwarves led by Balin recolonize Moria
2990: Birth of Peregrin Took (Pippin)
2991: Birth of Éomer
2994: Balin is killed (10th 'November'), Óin and Ori are killed, the Dwarf-colony in Moria is destroyed.
2995: Birth of Éowyn
3001: The narrative of The Lord of the Rings begins: Bilbo Baggins turns 111, passes the One Ring on to Frodo Baggins, and leaves the Shire. From now on Aragorn and Gandalf intermittently hunt Gollum
3002: Lalia Clayhanger, the matriarch of the Took clan, dies, aged 119, and possibly pushed by Pearl Took;[20] Bilbo settles in Rivendell
3007: Gilraen, Aragorn II's mother passes away at the age of 100 years
3014: Saruman begins using his influence to weaken Théoden, king of Rohan
3017: Gollum is released from Mordor; Aragorn finally tracks him down in the Dead Marshes, and brings him as a captive to King Thranduil's halls in Mirkwood

#### "The Great Years"
All entries are derived from Appendix B of The Lord of the Rings unless otherwise noted.

##### 3018
Sauron gives the nine Ringwraiths the task of locating and retrieving the One Ring.
'April' 12: Gandalf reaches Hobbiton in the Shire, telling Frodo Baggins he must take the Ring away.
'June' 20: Sauron's forces attack Osgiliath; around this time Gollum escapes Mirkwood.
Mid-year's Day: Gandalf, now in Bree, writes his letter to Frodo.
'July' 4: Boromir leaves Minas Tirith.
'July' 10: Saruman imprisons Gandalf in Orthanc.
'September' 18: Gandalf escapes from Orthanc with the aid of Gwaihir.
'September' 19–23: Gandalf reaches Edoras and acquires Shadowfax the horse.
'September' 23: Frodo leaves Bag End, bearing the One Ring, and accompanied by Sam Gamgee and Pippin Took; four of the Ringwraiths enter the Shire.
'September' 25: Frodo and his companions are joined by Merry Brandybuck at Crickhollow.
'September' 26: Frodo and his three companions enter the Old Forest and meet Tom Bombadil.
'September' 29: Aragorn meets Frodo in the Inn of the Prancing Pony in Bree; some of the Ringwraiths invade the inn.
'September' 30: Frodo and his companions, now including Aragorn and Bill the Pony, leave Bree.
'October' 6: Frodo wounded at Weathertop by the Witch-king (the leader of the Ringwraiths) using a Morgul-knife.
'October' 20: Frodo and his companions cross the ford of Bruinen, escaping the Ringwraiths.
'October' 25: Council of Elrond at Rivendell
'December' 25: The Fellowship of the Ring sets out in the evening from Rivendell

##### 3019

'January' 13: The Fellowship of the Ring enters the West-gate of Moria after nightfall.
'January' 15: Gandalf fights a Balrog; both fall into the Black Chasm of Moria.
'January' 15 – 'February' 15: the Fellowship sojourn in Lothlórien
'January' 17: the Fellowship visit Cerin Amroth, and in the evening arrive in Caras Galadhon, where they meet Galadriel and Celeborn
'February' 16: the Fellowship receive the gifts of Galadriel and depart Lothlórien, travelling in Elven-boats down the great river Anduin.
'February' 25: The Fellowship passes the Argonath and camp at Parth Galen. First Battle of Fords of Isen; Théodred son of Théoden is slain.
'February' 26: The breaking of the Fellowship: Boromir is killed, Frodo and Sam head east (followed by Gollum), the others go west.
'February' 29: Merry and Pippin escape the orcs and meet Treebeard.
'March' 1: Aragorn, Legolas and Gimli meet the resurrected Gandalf the White in Fangorn Forest while looking for Merry and Pippin, and they head off for Edoras. Frodo and Sam begin travelling through the Dead Marshes with Gollum.
'March' 3: Battle of the Hornburg.
'March' 5: Rohan's army reaches Isengard, Gandalf removes Saruman from the Order of Wizards, and acquires his palantír.
'March' 7: Faramir takes Frodo and Sam to Henneth Annûn.
'March' 8: Aragorn, Legolas and Gimli enter the Paths of the Dead.
'March' 9: Gandalf and Pippin arrive in Minas Tirith.
'March' 10: Frodo and Sam see the Morgul host led by the Witch-king leave Minas Morgul. An army from the Morannon takes Cair Andros and enters Anórien.
'March' 11: First assault on Lothlórien by Dol Guldur.
'March' 12: Gollum leads Frodo and Sam into Shelob's lair.
'March' 13: Frodo captured by Cirith Ungol orcs. Aragorn captures the black fleet at Pelargir.
'March' 15: The Witch-king breaks the gate of Minas Tirith in the early hours. Denethor burns himself to death on a pyre. Confrontation between Gandalf and the Witch-king at the gate; Horns of the Rohirrim are heard at a cockcrow. Battle of the Pelennor Fields: Théoden King of Rohan is killed by the Witch-king; Éomer succeeds him as the eighteenth king of Rohan. Éowyn and Merry kill the Witch-king. Aragorn, Rangers, the sons of Elrond and men from the southern fiefdoms of Gondor arrive in the black ships and turn the tide of battle. Sam and Frodo escape and journey along the Morgai. Battle under the trees in Mirkwood; second assault on Lothlórien.
'March' 16: Debate of the Captains of the West.
'March' 17: Battle of Dale. Kings Brand and Dáin Ironfoot fall in battle against invading Easterlings. Many Men and Dwarves take refuge in Erebor.
'March' 18: Armies of the West leave Minas Tirith. In Mordor, Frodo and Sam forced to join an orc company.
'March' 22: Third assault on Lothlórien.
'March' 25: The Host of the West is surrounded on the slag-hills outside the Black Gate of Mordor. Inside Mordor, Frodo and Sam reach the Sammath Naur on Mount Doom. Gollum seizes the One Ring from Frodo and falls with it into the Cracks of Doom, causing the Downfall of Barad-dûr and the passing of the Dark Lord Sauron.
'March' 28: Celeborn leads his forces in the attack and destruction of the fortress of Dol Guldur. Galadriel throws down its walls to cleanse Mirkwood of its evil.
'April' 8: the celebrations on the Field of Cormallen.
'May' 1: Aragorn is crowned King Elessar of the Reunited Kingdom of Arnor and Gondor.
'May' 20: Arwen Undómiel and her father Lord Elrond of Rivendell arrive in Lothlórien, where they are welcomed at Caras Galadhon by the Lady Galadriel and Lord Celeborn, grandparents of Lady Arwen through her mother, the Lady Celebrían.
'June' 25: Gandalf helps Aragorn to find the sapling of the new White Tree.
Mid-year's Day (between 'June' and 'July'): Aragorn marries Arwen Undómiel.
'August' 10: King Théoden is laid to rest beside other Kings of Rohan in Edoras. Faramir and Éowyn formally engage to marry.
'September' 21: the four hobbits arrive back in Rivendell.
'September' 22: Saruman arrives in the Shire.
'November' 1: the four hobbits arrested at Frogmorton.
'November' 3: Battle of Bywater; death of Saruman and Wormtongue, final end to the War of the Ring.

##### 3020–21

'May' 1, 3020: Sam Gamgee marries Rosie Cotton and together they move into Bag End, joining Frodo Baggins
'March' 25, 3021: Birth of Elanor the Fair, eldest child of Sam and Rosie
3021: Éomer marries Lothíriel, daughter of Imrahil, the Prince of Dol Amroth[21]
'September' 22, 3021: Bilbo marks his 131st birthday, surpassing the Old Took
'September' 29, 3021: Elrond, Galadriel, Gandalf, Bilbo and Frodo depart from the Grey Havens aboard the Ringbearers' ship.
'October' 6: Sam arrives back in Bag End: the end of the main narrative of The Lord of the Rings.

### Fourth Age

Length uncertain. All entries are derived from the Appendices to The Lord of the Rings, unless otherwise noted.

In the reckoning of Gondor, the Fourth Age began on 'March' 25, T.A. 3021. Since most of the following events had been dated according to the Shire-reckoning, their years in the Fourth Age cannot be stated with certainty. Some events may have occurred in the following year of the Fourth Age.

6: Peregrin Took marries Diamond of Long Cleeve
(Date uncertain): Meriadoc Brandybuck marries Estella Bolger, sister of Fredegar (Fatty) Bolger.
7: Samwise Gamgee is elected Mayor of the Shire
(Date uncertain): Birth of Elfwine, son of Éomer and Lothíriel
(Date uncertain): Birth of Elboron, son of Faramir and Éowyn
13: Peregrin Took becomes thirty-second Thain of the Shire
15: Death of Glóin, father of Gimli.
c. 20: Legolas brought south Elves out of Greenwood, and they dwelt in Ithilien, and it became once again the "fairest country in all the westlands."[22][23]
c. 20: Gimli similarly brought south Dwarves out of Erebor, and became Lord of the Glittering Caves above Helm's Deep. His people forged new gates of mithril and steel for Gondor.[23]
34: Death of Imrahil Prince of Dol Amroth. Imrahil's son Elphir assumes the Principality.
41: Birth of Holfast Gardner, son and heir of Frodo Gardner (eldest son of Samwise Gamgee)
61: Samwise Gamgee gives Bag End to Frodo Gardner, the Red Book to his eldest child Elanor the Fair, and leaves Middle-earth via Mithlond.
63: Meriadoc Brandybuck, aged 102, and Pippin leave the Shire to live in Gondor; death of Éomer, aged 93, whose son Elfwine ascends the throne of Rohan.
67: Death of Prince Elphir son of Imrahil, twenty-third Prince of Dol Amroth. Elphir's son Alphros assumes the Principality.[24]
80: Birth of Harding of the Hill, Sam Gamgee's heir and great-grandson
82: Death of Faramir, aged 120. His son Elboron assumes the Principality of Ithilien.[24]
91: Death of Dwalin (brother of Balin) aged 341, the oldest known Dwarf except Durin the Deathless.
95: Death of Prince Alphros of Dol Amroth, son of Elphir.[24]
120: Death of Aragorn, King of the Reunited Kingdom of Arnor and Gondor, after 210 years of life and 122 years of reign; his son Eldarion ascends the throne. The bodies of Meriadoc and Peregrin are laid beside that of Aragorn in Rath Dínen. According to legend, on the death of Aragorn, Legolas builds a ship and sails into the west to the Undying Lands, taking Gimli the Dwarf (now aged 261) with him and marking an end to the Fellowship of the Ring.
121: Death of Arwen, aged 2901
172: A copy of the Red Book of Westmarch is completed in Minas Tirith[25]
185: Death of Harding of the Hill,[26] Sam Gamgee's great-grandson, and owner of Bag End
c. 220: End of Eldarion's reign; The New Shadow is set in this period.[27]
(Date uncertain): Accession of Durin VII "the Last", King of the Dwarves; he reputedly re-colonizes Moria
(Date uncertain): Celeborn leaves Rivendell for the Grey Havens in order to depart Middle-earth[28]

### Subsequent Ages

The shape of Middle-earth changes,[29] eventually becoming the Old World[30]
The prophesied Final Battle, in which evil is finally destroyed and the World ends, followed by the establishment of a paradisiacal new world: Arda Healed.

## Battles

### First Age

Years of the Trees

4590: Battle of the Powers
4995: Kinslaying at Alqualondë
4997: First Battle of Beleriand; Second Great Battle: Dagor-nuin-Giliath, Battle under the Stars
5000: Battle of the Lammoth
Years of the Sun

60: Third Great Battle of Beleriand: Dagor Aglareb, Glorious Battle—start of the Siege of Angband
60–455: Siege of Angband
155: Battle of the Firth of Drengist
260: First coming of Glaurung
455–466: Fourth Great Battle of Beleriand: Dagor Bragollach, Battle of Sudden Flame, which ended the Siege of Angband
472: Fifth Great Battle of Beleriand: Nírnaeth Arnoediad, Battle of Unnumbered Tears
495: Battle of Tumhalad and Sack of Nargothrond
503: First sack of Doriath
506–507: Second sack of Doriath
510: Fall of Gondolin
538: Sack of the Mouths of Sirion
545–587: War of Wrath
See also Battles of Beleriand.

### Second Age

1693–1701: War of the Elves and Sauron; 1697: Eregion falls
3255: Ar-Pharazôn's armada humbles Sauron
3319: Ar-Pharazôn assails Aman—Downfall of Númenor
3429: Sauron conquers Minas Ithil and attacks Minas Anor
3434: Battle of Dagorlad
3434–3441: Siege of Barad-dûr
3441: Battle between Sauron and Elendil and Gil-galad on the slopes of Mount Doom

### Third Age

2 (5th 'October'): Disaster of the Gladden Fields
1432: Kin-strife becomes open rebellion
1447: Battle of the Crossings of Erui
1856: Battle of the Plains
1945: Battle of the Camp
1975: Battle of Fornost
2510 (15th 'April'): Battle of the Field of Celebrant
2747: Battle of Greenfields
2799: Battle of Azanulbizar (part of the War of the Dwarves and Orcs)
2885: Battle of the Crossings of Poros
2941: Battle of Five Armies
#### War of the Ring

##### Main battles

'February' 23, 3019: First Battle of the Fords of Isen
'March' 2, 3019: Second Battle of the Fords of Isen
'March' 2, 3019: Destruction of Isengard
'March' 3, 3019: Battle of the Hornburg
'March' 13, 3019: Battle of Osgiliath
'March' 15, 3019: Battle of the Pelennor Fields
'March' 17–20, 3019: Battle of Dale
'March' 25, 3019: Battle of the Morannon
'March' 27, 3019: Lifting of the siege of Erebor
'November' 3, 3019: Battle of Bywater

##### Other conflicts during the War of the Ring

'June' 20, 3018: Sauron attacks Osgiliath
'September' 23, 3018: Nazgûl attack the Rangers guarding the Shire
'September' 23, 3018: encounters with Black Riders (Nazgûl) in the Shire
'September' 26, 3018: Old Man Willow attempts to entrap Frodo Baggins and his companions: Sam Gamgee, Merry Brandybuck and Pippin Took
'September' 28, 3018: Frodo and his companions are captured by a barrow-wight
'September' 30, 3018: Nazgûl attack Bree
'October' 3, 3018: battle of Gandalf with the Nazgûl on Weathertop
'October' 6, 3018: Nazgûl attack Aragorn, Frodo and his companions on Weathertop
'October' 11, 3018: Glorfindel drives the Nazgûl from the Bridge of Mitheithel
'October' 20, 3018: unhorsing of the Nazgûl at the Ford of Bruinen
'January' 13, 3019: attack on the Fellowship by Wargs near the pass of Caradhras
'January' 14, 3019: battles with orcs in Moria
'January' 15–25 3019: combat of Gandalf with the Balrog upon the Bridge of Khazad-dûm and their Battle of the Peak
'January' 17, 3019: orc companies follow Fellowship into Lothlórien and are destroyed
'February' 23, 3019: arrows fired as the Fellowship pass Sarn Gebir
'February' 23, 3019: first Battle of the Fords of Isen
'February' 26, 3019: battles with orcs near Parth Galen
'February' 29, 3019: Rohirrim destroy the orcs who captured Merry and Pippin
Orc fights:
'February' 27, 3019: on the plains of Rohan
'March' 15, 3019: in Cirith Ungol
'March' 19, 3019: in Mordor en route to the Morannon
'March' 2, 3019: Ents destroy an army of Orcs out on the Wold
'March' 7, 3019: The Rangers of Ithilien ambush a company of Haradrim in northern Ithilien (witnessed by Frodo and Sam)
'March' 11–22, 3019: battles under the trees of Lothórien
'March' 12, 3019: Sam fights Shelob
'March' 12, 3019: Aragorn and the Dead Men of Dunharrow capture the Corsair fleet at Pelargir
'March' 23–25, 3019: Battle of Mirkwood
between 'March' 23 and 25, 3019: Cair Andros retaken
'March' 25, 3019: Frodo fights Gollum in the Crack of Doom. Destruction of Barad-dûr
'November' 1, 3019: Hobbits attack Bill Ferny at the Brandywine Bridge and are subsequently arrested

### End of the world

Final Battle (prophesied)

## Other timelines of interest

*   Book publishing dates
*   dynastic timelines:
    *   Chieftains of the Dúnedain
    *   Kings and Queens of Númenor
    *   Line of Durin's folk
    *   Princes of Dol Amroth
    *   Stewards of Gondor
    *   Thains of the Shire
*   Old Forest timeline
*   Realms of Arda
*   Sundering of the Elves
*   Wars and battles of Arda
