# Third Age

Further information: Timeline of Arda § Third Age, and Of the Rings of Power and the Third Age

The Third Age lasted for 3021 years, beginning with the first downfall of
Sauron, when he was defeated by the Last Alliance of Elves and Men following
the downfall of Númenor and ending with the War of the Ring and final defeat of
Sauron, the events narrated in The Lord of the Rings. Virtually the entire
history of the Third Age takes place in Middle-earth.

The Third Age saw the rise in power of the realms of Arnor and Gondor, and
their fall. Arnor was divided into three petty Kingdoms, which fell one by one,
whilst Gondor fell victim to Kin-strife, plague, Wainriders, and Corsairs. In
this time, the line of the Kings of Gondor ends, with the House of the Stewards
ruling in their stead. Meanwhile, the heirs of Isildur from the fallen kingdom
of Arnor wander Middle-earth, aided only by Elrond in Rivendell; but the line
of rightful heirs remains unbroken throughout the age.

This age was characterized by the waning of the Elves. In the beginning of the
Third Age, many Elves left for Valinor because they were disturbed by the
recent war. However, Elven kingdoms still survived in Lindon, Lothlórien, and
Mirkwood. Rivendell also became a prominent haven for the Elves and other
races. Throughout the Age, they chose not to mingle much in the matters of
other lands, and only came to the aid of other races in time of war. The Elves
chose to devote themselves to artistic pleasures, and tended to the lands which
they occupied. The gradual decline of Elven populations occurred throughout the
Age as the rise of Sauron came to dominate Middle-earth. By the end of the
Third Age, only mere fragments of the once-grand Elven civilization survived in
Middle-earth.

The Wizards arrive during this period to aid the Free Peoples, most importantly
Gandalf and Saruman. The One Ring was found by Sméagol but, under the power of
the Ring and ignorant of its true nature, he retreated with the Ring to a
secret life under the Misty Mountains.

Middle-earth's devastating Great Plague originated in its vast eastern region,
Rhûn, where it caused considerable suffering. By the winter of late T.A. 1635
the Plague spread from Rhûn into Wilderland, on the east of Middle-earth's
western lands; in Wilderland it killed more than half the population. In the
following year the Great Plague spread into Gondor and then Eriador. In Gondor
the Plague caused many deaths, including king Telemnar, his children, and the
White Tree; the population of the capital city Osgiliath was decimated, and
government of the kingdom was transferred to Minas Tirith. In Eriador, the
nascent Hobbit-realm of the Shire suffered "great loss" in what they called the
Dark Plague.

The so-called Watchful Peace began in T.A. 2063, when Gandalf went to Dol
Guldur and the evil dwelling there (later known to be Sauron) fled to the
far east. It lasted until 2460 T.A., when Sauron returned with new strength.
During this period Gondor strengthened its borders, keeping a watchful eye on
the east, as Minas Morgul was still a threat on their flank and Mordor was
still occupied with Orcs. But no major escalations occurred except for minor
skirmishes with Umbar. In the north, Arnor was long gone, but the Hobbits of
the Shire prospered, getting their first Took Thain, and colonizing Buckland.
The Dwarves of Durin's folk under Thorin I abandoned Erebor, and left for the
Grey Mountains, where most of their kin now gathered. Meanwhile, Sauron was not
idle in the east: he created a strong alliance between the various tribes of
Easterlings, so that when he returned he was more powerful and had many Men in
his service.

The main events of The Hobbit occur in T.A. 2941.

By the time of The Lord of the Rings, Sauron had recovered again, and was
seeking the One Ring. The events of the ensuing War of the Ring leading to the
end of the Third Age is the subject of The Lord of the Rings, and summarized in
Of the Rings of Power and the Third Age (written c. 1948 and published in The
Silmarillion). After the defeat of Sauron, Aragorn takes his place as King of
the Reunited Kingdom of Arnor and Gondor, restoring the line of Kings from the
Stewards of Gondor. Aragorn marries the daughter of Elrond, Arwen. And as the
age ends, Gandalf and many of the remaining elves of Middle-earth leave in a
ship which departs from the Grey Havens, and go to Aman.
